A 1922 flank eruption sent lava to the Atlantic coast and the 1999 eruption came within 200 m (660 ft) of the sea.
A BRT network is planned for Douala, with the first 3 lines projected to open in 2024-2025.
A British parliamentary publication, Report on the British Sphere of the Cameroons (May 1922, p.
A Directory of African Wetlands.
A History of Sub-Saharan Africa.
A June 2018 report by the BBC News found a widespread pattern of villages throughout the Southwest Region being burnt, including one video of men wearing government-issued BIR (Bataillon d'Intervention Rapide) equipment.
A UN-mediated summit in June 2006 facilitated an agreement for Nigeria to withdraw from the region and both leaders signed the Greentree Agreement.
A boundary was agreed along a line from Say on the Niger to Barruwa on Lake Chad, but leaving the Sokoto Caliphate in the British sphere.
A brief conflict ensued with rival Duala chiefs which Germany and its allies won, leaving the British with little choice but to acknowledge Germany's claim to the region.
A case has been made out for borrowings of many place-names and even misremembered rhymes – chiefly from one of the Luba varieties – in the USA.
A civilian was also killed in the clashes.
A civilian who got caught in the crossfire was also killed.
A commercial motorcycle was also seized and set on fire by the fighters for violating ghost town.
A common characteristic of Bantu languages is that they use words such as muntu or mutu for "human being" or in simplistic terms "person", and the plural prefix for human nouns starting with mu- (class 1) in most languages is ba- (class 2), thus giving bantu for "people".
A common theme during the colonial period is the slave narrative, often written in English or French for Western audiences.
A feudal empire with local rulers pledging allegiance and paying tributes to the Caliph, northern Cameroon was likely part of the Adamawa Emirate within the Caliphate.
A group calling itself the "Al-Qaeda Squad of Meme", led by "Field Marshall Lucifer", claimed responsibility.
A group known as the Ambazonia State Army, led by "General Talk and Do", held a military parade in Kikaikom.
A high proportion of Duala grew wealthy through the new trade, and tensions arose between the haves and have-nots.
A local separatist leader identified those killed as rogue separatists.
A locally made bomb exploded in Nkwen, Bamenda, causing no casualties.
A major drought started in the Sahel region in the late 1960s and caused severe damage in 1972 and 1984.
A military assault on the separatists in Ekona failed to lift the blockade.
A mixture of English, French, and Pidgin called Camfranglais has been gaining popularity in urban centres since the mid-1970s.
A month later, the same militia killed five soldiers in an attack on an outpost in Bui, two weeks into a separatist offensive against Cameroon in the area.
A month later, two suspected separatists were lynched by the villagers, and the Cameroonian Army launched an offensive nearby.
A native of Cameroon’s south, Biya rose rapidly as a bureaucrat under President Ahmadou Ahidjo in the 1960s, as Secretary-General of the Presidency from 1968 to 1975 and then as prime minister.
A number of people were shot, and one CPDM Councilor was killed after getting caught in the crossfire during a shootout between separatist fighters and police forces.
A parliamentary election was held in February, and was marked by unprecedented escalation on both sides.
A permanent monumental sculpture made with recycled material located at a main roundabout in Douala.
A petition to the United Nations gave details of police raping students at a university.
A portion of the Bomboko Forest Reserve remains outside the park, on the lower northern slopes of the mountain.
A precocious talent, Eto'o moved to Real Madrid as a 16 year old.
A separatist attack on a civilian truck with a military escort left some three civilians dead on 19 December.
A separatist commander known as "General Popo" was killed.
A separatist group known as the "Pythons of Boyo," led by "General Nyih", claimed responsibility.
A separatist militia called the "Fako Action Forces" claimed responsibility.
A series of these began in 1910, when the German administration initiated a new poll tax, attempted to seize lands in Douala township, and then tried to oust the native population from the town completely.
A similar operation freed seven Swiss, six Cameroonian and five Italian hostages on 4 April, prompting the ADF to declare that it did not take hostages nor target foreigners.
A similar protest and crackdown took place at Buea Central Prison a few days later.
A small community has begun to practice Judaism in Douala, but they do not have a synagogue yet.
A small group of separatists from Ambazonia Liberation Council claimed responsibility.
A small number of Shuwa Arabs live near Lake Chad.
A survey examining the methods and instruments of communication among the Bamilekes show a common origin with populations along the Nile.
A team of 40-50 canoeists, mostly men who make their livings as fishermen, mans each vessel.
A total of 69 leaders and activists were extradited to Cameroon and subsequently arrested, including President Sisiku Julius Ayuk Tabe.
A treaty was signed with the local chiefs.
A typical Duala racing pirogue is 20–28 metres long with no keel and a bow carved with intricate designs.
A typical dish is based on cocoyams, maize, cassava (manioc), millet, plantains, potatoes, rice, or yams, often pounded into dough-like fufu.
A week later, separatists – possibly the ADF – raided Penda Mboko, Littoral Region, and injured three gendarmes.
ADF commander "General Sumanguru" organized a similar parade in Momo department.
AGovC leader Ayaba Cho Lucas summed up the ADF strategy in the following way: "60% of the GDP of Cameroon is earned in Ambazonia.
AGovC vice president Julius Nyih took over as interim leader of the organization, in accordance with a contingency succession plan.
About 1568 to 1569, the Jaga invaded Kongo, laying waste to the kingdom and forcing the manikongo into exile.
About one-sixth of Bantu speakers, and one-third of Bantu languages, are found in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Access to financial services is limited, particularly for SMEs.
According to ADF deputy defense chief Daniel Caapo, this would entail joint military operations, joint training bases, and an effort to seize the mutual border and ensure a free flow of weapons and personnel.
According to Cameroon, seven separatists were killed as the Cameroonian Army overran their base.
According to Dr John Feyou de Hapy, Bamiléké means "people of faith".
According to Duala traditions, the Bakoko and Bassa ethnic groups occupied the Wouri estuary when the Duala arrived.
According to Jacques Soulillou, historical images of Douala document the areas of Akwa (Plateau Joss) and the port between 1860 and 1960, while the districts of Bonaberi, Deido and New Bell have almost no images.
According to Millan Atam, chairperson of the Southern Cameroonians Congress of the People, the separatists are building up support for their cause through two distinct phases.
According to OCHA, more than 1.7 million people require humanitarian assistance in the northwest and southwest regions.
According to Zagato and Holl, there is evidence of iron smelting in the Central African Republic that may date back to 3000 to 2500 BCE.
According to an International Crisis Group analyst, by October the war had reached a stalemate, with the army being unable to defeat the separatists, while the separatists were not militarily strong enough to expel the army.
According to custom, the eldest son is the probable heir, but a father may choose any one of his sons to succeed him.
According to local newspapers, a number had re-joined the separatist ranks.
According to local sources, one of them was killed while attempting to escape.
According to local sources, separatists meant to target the Divisional Officer of Galim.
According to official results, Biya won the first multiparty presidential election, held on 11 October 1992, with about 40% of the vote.
According to research compiled in The Historical Dictionary of the Republic of Cameroon, the "Bamiléké have a reputation of being excellent farmers and business-persons.
According to the ADF, as of June 2018 there were 1,500 soldiers in the ADF, spread across 20 camps throughout Southern Cameroons.
According to the Cameroonian government, Oliver and one of his guards had been killed in a Cameroonian raid.
According to the Cameroonian military, six people were killed in clashes in the preceding week.
According to the World Health Organization (WHO), the fertility rate was 4.8 in 2013 with a population growth rate of 2.56%.
According to the records of Claudius Ptolemy in the mid-2nd century AD, the Romans of the 1st century AD had already come into contact with Lake Chad through their connections with Tunisia, Tripolitania, and Fezzan.
Achu is highly traditional and is often served as the main dish during cultural events and celebrations.
Actes du XVIIe colloque international de l'AIDELF, Ouagadougou, novembre 2012 (PDF) (in French).
Additionally, he was named the best player of the tournament.
Additionally, the team already had its full quota of three non-EU players.
Africa In History, Themes and Outlines (Revised and expanded ed.).
African Affairs magazine noted in the early 1980s that they "continue to dominate almost all key sectors of the economy, much as they did before independence.
African Crossroads: intersections between history and anthropology in Cameroon Berghahn Books, 1996) online Geschiere, Peter.
African Historical Dictionaries.
African cinema African-American literature Caine Prize for African Writing Heinemann African Writers Series International Research Confederacy on African Literature and Culture List of African novelists List of African writers by country Poetry in Africa Werku, Dagnachew, The Thirteenth Sun, 1968.
African literature in the late colonial period (between the end of World War I and independence) increasingly showed themes of liberation, independence, and (among Africans in francophone territories) négritude.
African literature in the late colonial period increasingly features themes of liberation and independence.
African literature is literature from Africa, either oral ("orature") or written in African and Afro-Asiatic languages.
African writers in this period wrote both in Western languages (notably English, French, and Portuguese) and in traditional African languages such as Hausa.
Afrika und Übersee: Sprachen, Kulturen (in German).
Afrique Centrale.org Africa Interactive Map from the United States Army Africa African Pygmies—Among the earliest inhabitants of Central Africa
After 25 minutes, England's David Platt scored for England, while in the second-half, Cameroon came back with a 61st-minute penalty from Emmanuel Kundé and took the lead with Eugène Ekéké on 65 minutes.
After Ahidjo resigned as CNU leader, Biya took the helm of the party at an "extraordinary session" of the CNU party held on 14 September 1983.
After Barcelona won the 2004–05 La Liga title, the team organized a festive party in the Camp Nou, during which Eto'o harangued the fans chanting, "Madrid, cabrón, saluda al campeón" (English for, "Madrid, bastards, salute the champions").
After Biya became president, Ahidjo initially remained head of the ruling Cameroon National Union (CNU/ UNC).
After Guinea, it was the second of France's colonies in Sub-Saharan Africa to become independent.
After Ibrahimović agreed terms with Barcelona, the club announced Eto'o would travel to Milan for his medical to complete the transfer.
After Maxwell completed the transfer from Inter Milan, Joan Laporta confirmed that there was an agreement in principle between Barcelona and Inter Milan for Zlatan Ibrahimović to join the club in exchange for Eto'o and €46 million.
After World War I in 1919, the German colonial territories became French and British protectorates.
After World War I, it was divided between France and the United Kingdom as League of Nations mandates until independence in 1960 and 1961 respectively.
After World War II, writers such as Mongo Beti and Ferdinand Oyono analysed and criticised colonialism and rejected assimilation.
After a 2–2 draw against Sweden, Cameroon lost to Brazil and Russia sealed their elimination.
After a man's death, all of his possessions typically go to a single, male heir.
After a period of internal instability, the center of power shifted to Bornu with its capital at Ngazargamu, in what is now northwestern Nigeria, and territory was gradually reconquered and new territory in present-day Niger also conquered.
After a slow start in their campaign with a loss to Togo, the coach of Cameroon, Otto Pfister, resigned.
After aggravating a meniscus injury on 28 August during a summer friendly against Inter Milan, Eto'o was sidelined indefinitely.
After an intervention from Cameroon Prime Minister Philemon Yang, Eto'o agreed to return for the second leg.
After being re-elected in 2004, Biya was barred by a two-term limit in the 1996 Constitution from running for president again in 2011; however, he sought to revise this, to allow him to run again.
After brief spells with Anzhi Makhachkala, Chelsea, Everton, and Sampdoria, Eto'o found prolific form again in the Süper Lig with Antalyaspor having scored 44 goals in 76 league games.
After clashes with the police, the SCNC was officially declared illegal by the Cameroonian authorities in 2001.
After experiencing regular racist abuse from sections of support in Spanish crowds, Eto'o stopped bringing family members to matches.
After his World Cup success, he returned to Tonnerre in Cameroon for four seasons.
After joining Everton, on 27 August 2014, Eto'o announced his retirement from international competition.
After making 30 appearances for the club and only scoring four goals, he returned to Madrid following the end of the 1998–99 season.
After missing out on the previous year's Pichichi trophy, which is given to the top scorer in La Liga, Eto'o edged out Valencia striker David Villa for the award during the final matchday on 20 May 2006 when he scored his 26th goal of the season against Athletic Bilbao.
After play was resumed, the rest of the stadium chanted loudly in an attempt to drown out the racist chants in order to avoid the match being suspended.
After securing a 1–0 victory over Burundi in the first leg, they needed to confirm their qualification in the second leg to avoid missing out on the continent's most prestigious competition, which would have meant watching it on television.
After several days of widespread rioting, looting, and reports of gunfire in all the major cities, calm was eventually restored after a crackdown with thousands arrested, and at least several dozen killed.
After some discussion (which had been going on since 1959), a plebiscite was agreed to and held on 11 February 1961.
After the Allied victory, the territory was partitioned between the United Kingdom and France, which was formalized on June 28, 1919, with League of Nations mandates (Class B).
After the Arabs conquered North Africa during the 7th and 8th centuries, the Chad Basin became increasingly linked to the Muslim countries.
After the Brazil-South Korea match, he was filmed kneeing a man in the face after a confrontation.
After the First World War, the League of Nations mandated France to administer most of the territory, with the United Kingdom administering a small portion in the west.
After the Muslim conquest of North Africa in 709, Islam's influence began to spread south with the growth of trans-Saharan trade, including in what is now northern Cameroon.
After the dramatic qualification process for the previous World Cup, the Indomitable Lions of Cameroon had to wait until the last day to secure their ticket for the AfCoN 2023 (scheduled to be played in January 2024) in Ivory Coast.
After the game, Inter President Massimo Moratti said, "I'm not sure if the deal that brought Eto'o to the club was my best piece of transfer business ever, but I really think it was a great piece of business for us.
After the independence of 1960 a new development and urban plan were established.
After the operation, Eto'o's recovery time was extended to five months, but he resumed training with Barcelona in early January 2007.
After this is completed, the family must gather at the home.
Afterward, Cameroonian forces organized revenge raids in the area, set ablaze houses in three villages of the Bui Division, and killed three civilians and one separatist fighter in Bamfem.
Agriculture also emerged in the Sahel region at this time.
Ahidjo aligned himself closely with France and allowed many French advisers and administrators to stay on as well as leaving most of the country's assets in the hands of French companies.
Ahidjo announced his resignation on 4 November 1982 and Biya became president two days later on 6 November.
Ahidjo denied knowledge or responsibility for the coup attempt but was widely viewed as behind it.
Ahidjo left for France and publicly accused Biya of abuse of power.
Ahidjo pursued an economic policy of planned liberalism, prioritising cash crops and petroleum development.
Ahidjo requested continued French assistance in suppressing the UPC rebels in what became known as the Bamileke War, after the region where much of the fighting took place.
Ahidjo sought to use his continuing control over the party apparatus to sideline Biya, by causing the party, not the President to set the government's agenda.
Ahidjo stepped down on 4 November 1982 and left power to his constitutional successor, Paul Biya.
Ahidjo used the ongoing war with the UPC to concentrate power in the presidency, continuing with this even after the suppression of the UPC in 1971.
Ahidjo went into exile in France, and from there, he publicly accused Biya of abuse of power and paranoia about plots against him.
Ahidjo's political party, the Cameroon National Union (CNU), became the sole legal political party on 1 September 1966, and on 20 May 1972, a referendum was passed to abolish the federal system of government in favour of a United Republic of Cameroon, headed from Yaoundé.
Akwa is Douala's business district and Bonanjo its administrative district.
Albert Roger Miller (born 20 May 1952), known as Roger Milla, is a Cameroonian former professional footballer who played as a forward.
Alfred Saker opened a mission in Douala in 1845.
All 79 students were released without ransom three days later.
All Bantu languages are agglutinative.
All local government officials are employees of the central government's Ministry of Territorial Administration, from which local governments also get most of their budgets.
All schools in the Anglophone regions were shut down.
All the women were released the same day as the incident was first reported, many with serious injuries; a local source said that some had gunfire wounds and that one might require an amputation.
Along the city's main thoroughfare lie some of Cameroon's best restaurants, coffee houses and French-style patisseries; along the waterfront, many bars and bistros may be found, commanding views of the Gulf of Guinea and nearby mangrove swamps.
Also impacting women's and girls' health, the contraceptive prevalence rate is estimated to be just 34.4% in 2014.
Also recited, often sung, are love songs, work songs, children's songs, along with epigrams, proverbs and riddles.
Although Ahidjo's rule was authoritarian, he was seen as noticeably lacking in charisma in comparison to many post-colonial African leaders.
Although Biya made some efforts to open up the political environment, his regime still retains clear authoritarian characteristics and has largely bucked the trend toward democracy in Africa since the 1990s.
Although Nigeria initially protested the decision, and although it caused significant unrest in Bakassi, the Nigerian government largely cooperated with the ruling.
Although attendance rates are higher in the south, a disproportionate number of teachers are stationed there, leaving northern schools chronically understaffed.
Although nominally independent, the judiciary falls under the authority of the executive's Ministry of Justice.
Although press freedoms have improved since the first decade of the 21st century, the press is corrupt and beholden to special interests and political groups.
Although the main accompaniment is yellow soup, the dish is sometimes served with green soup as well.
Although the national sex ratio is relatively even, these out-migrants are primarily males, which leads to unbalanced ratios in some regions.
Although the work moves between fiction and political advocacy, its publication and positive reviews in the Western press mark a watershed moment in African literature.
Amateur football clubs abound, organised along ethnic lines or under corporate sponsors.
Ambazonia History of Africa Politics of Cameroon List of heads of government of Cameroon List of heads of state of Cameroon Douala history and timeline Yaoundé history and timeline Background Note: Cameroon from the U.S.
Ambazonia Restoration Forces commander Sagon Jaguar said in a video that his forces had destroyed five military vehicles in Bamessing using IEDs.
Ambazonian forces carried out subsequent attacks in Belegete, where they burned houses and attacked civilians with guns and cutlasses.
Amnesty International and International PEN's Writers in Prison Committee both protested his arrest and issued appeals on his behalf; Amnesty International also named him a prisoner of conscience.
Among the Duala proper, these are the Bonanjo (including the Bonapriso), the Bonaku, the Bonabela, and the Bonaberi.
Among the first pieces of African literature to receive significant worldwide critical acclaim was Things Fall Apart, by Chinua Achebe, published in 1958.
Among the first pieces of African literature to receive significant worldwide critical acclaim was the novel Things Fall Apart, by Chinua Achebe.
Among the most notable religious holidays are Assumption Day, and Ascension Day, which is typically 39 days after Easter.
Among the traditional sculptures of the country's cultural heritage, Bangwa ritual sculptures made by Ateu Atsa (c.
Among those buildings are the casino, the show-room La Meublerie, the exhibition hall Cami-Toyota, Union Bank of Cameroon, Immeuble Hollando, the Baptist church, Immeuble Victoria, headquarters of CA-SCB, espace doual'art, and Orange Flagship.
Among youths aged 15–24, the literacy rate was 85.4% for males and 76.4% for females.
An agreement between the two countries in 1975 was derailed by a coup in Nigeria.
An analysis of Bamileke sculpture found that artists do not produce but create.
An attempt was also made to abduct the Fon of Buea.
An autopsy determined the cause of death to have been hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, an hereditary condition known to increase the risk of sudden death during physical exercise.
An economic crisis took effect in the mid-1980s to late 1990s as a result of international economic conditions, drought, falling petroleum prices, and years of corruption, mismanagement, and cronyism.
An elephant mask, called a mbap mteng, has protruding circular ears, a human-like face, and decorative panels on the front and back that hang down to the knees and are covered overall in beautiful geometric beadwork, including triangular imagery.
An estimated 2,500–3,000 years ago (1000 BC to 500 BC), speakers of the Proto-Bantu language began a series of migrations eastward and southward, carrying agriculture with them.
An estimated 38% of the population are Western highlanders–Semi-Bantu or grassfielders including the Bamileke, Bamum, and many smaller Tikar groups in the northwest.
An estimated 70% of the population farms, and agriculture comprised an estimated 16.7% of GDP in 2017.
An example from Chewa: the word "school", borrowed from English, and then transformed to fit the sound patterns of this language, is sukulu.
An heir takes his dead father's name and inherits any titles held by the latter, including the right to membership in any societies to which he belonged.
An insurrection broke out among the Bassa people on 18 to 19 December 1956.
An irregular chain of mountains, hills, and plateaus known as the Cameroon range extends from Mount Cameroon on the coast—Cameroon's highest point at 4,095 metres (13,435 ft)—almost to Lake Chad at Cameroon's northern border at 13°05'N.
An object is considered beautiful because of the truths it reveals and the communities it helps to build.
An unspecified number of soldiers were also wounded in the ambush.
And, until the mid-1960s, when the law governing polygamy was changed, the heir also inherited his father's wives--a considerable economic responsibility.
Anglophone groups have disputed these figures.
Anglophone refugees in Nigeria also celebrated the independence day.
Anglophones lost their family and friends in some of the riots.
Anne-Marie Nzié was perhaps the most important of the early innovators.
Another attack took place in Njinkom.
Another attempt at a detailed genetic classification to replace the Guthrie system is the 1999 "Tervuren" proposal of Bastin, Coupez, and Mann.
Another civilian was killed in Bui four days later.
Another example is buledi for "bread".
Another explosion in the beginning of July wounded two people.
Another of these is the muemba (plural: miemba), a grouping of all Duala of a certain age range or tribal clan.
Another person was killed by soldiers in Mbiame.
Another pop singer in 1970s Cameroon was André-Marie Tala, a blind singer who had a pair of hits with "Sikati" and "Potaksima." By the 1970s, bikutsi performers like Maurice Elanga, Les Veterans, and Mbarga Soukous, added brass instruments and found controversy over pornographic lyrics.
Another raid on separatist camps near Chomba killed at least 15 separatists.
Another separatist general, "Bush General", was taken prisoner.
Another study performed by Djoukwo and Wang found that pottery creation among the Bamiléké is used as a form of art therapy.
Another type of ceremony is the mevungu, when women dance all night to abstain from sex during those hours for a period of nine days.
Another well-known book is the Garima Gospels, one of the oldest known surviving bibles in the world, written in Ge'ez around 500 AD.
Anyone accused of "compromising public safety" was handled outside traditional criminal process without the right to a lawyer or any appeal.
Anzhi's billionaire owner Suleyman Kerimov shocked the Russian football world by deciding in August 2013 to scale down the club's ambitions and drastically shrink its budget.
Apart from these originating rivers, the largest tributary of the Sanaga is Mbam River with a total length of 548 km (341 mi).
Approximately 14,000 non-Africans live in Cameroon, including more than 6,000 French people and around 1,000 Americans.
April is usually the hottest month of the year, with temperatures occasionally reaching 40 °C (104 °F), the lowest water levels appear in June to July, and the highest water levels in November to December, with surface water temperatures ranging from 19 to 32 °C (66 to 90 °F).
Archaeological research has been relatively scarce in Cameroon due to a lack of resources and transportation infrastructure.
Archeological finds in Central Africa have been made which date back over 100,000 years.
Architectures allemandes au Cameroun 1884-1914.
Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 February 2019.
Archived from the original (PDF) on 2009-03-25.
Archived from the original on 16 October 2019.
Archived from the original on 2013-01-15.
Archived from the original on 2013-01-26.
Armed separatist groups are kidnapping, terrorizing, and killing civilians across the English-speaking regions with no apparent fear of being held to account by either their own leaders or Cameroonian law enforcement".
Around 15% of the forest area was found within protected areas, for the year 2015, 100% of the forest area was reported to be under public ownership.
Around 20,000–40,000 years ago, eolianite sand dunes began to form in the north of the basin.
Around 25 percent of Cameroonians have access to a bank account(as of 2024).
Around 2500 BCE, Bantu migrants had reached the Great Lakes Region in Central Africa.
Around 900 AD, the Kanem people who spoke the Kanuri language unified numerous nomadic tribes and established the Kanem Empire in the northeast of Lake Chad.
Around the same time, separatists imposed a three-day lockdown in response to Cameroonian plans to begin rebuilding the Anglophone regions with the support of the UNDP, titled "Presidential Programme for the Reconstruction and Development" (PPRD).
Around this same time, King Bell faced off against his own people, who were largely opposed to the German rule.
Around this time, the Aro Confederacy, was expanding its economic and political influence from southeastern Nigeria into western Cameroon.
Arte da lingua de Angola: oeferecida [sic] a virgem Senhora N.
Artists such as Anne-Marie Nzié developed it into popular dance music beginning in the 1940s, and performers such as Mama Ohandja and Les Têtes Brulées popularised it internationally during the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s.
As George Joseph notes in his chapter on African Literature in Understanding Contemporary Africa, whereas European views of literature stressed a separation of art and content, African awareness is inclusive and "literature" can also simply mean an artistic use of words for the sake of art alone.
As a Chargé de Mission in post-independence 1960s Cameroon, Biya rose to prominence under President Ahmadou Ahidjo.
As a member of the Cameroon national team, Eto'o was a part of the squad that won the Gold Medal at the 2000 Olympics.
As a response, the Cameroonian Army burned down the village.
As a result of continued opposition, many of the changes adopted in 1996 have never been fully implemented and power remains highly centralized in the President.
As a result of the lockdown, Youth Day celebrations had negligible turnout in Southern Cameroons.
As a result, almost all of the star players, previously signed in a bid to make the club world-beaters, were available on the transfer market.
As another example, "Haraka haraka" would mean "hurrying just for the sake of hurrying" (reckless hurry), as in "Njoo!
As another example, in Mali, oral literature or folktales continue to be broadcast on the radio in the native language Booma.
As champions, Cameroon qualified for the 2017 FIFA Confederations Cup in Russia, where they were eliminated in the group stage.
As in most large cities in Cameroon there are several nursery, primary, secondary and high schools in the city.
As might be expected for coastal peoples, the sea also plays an important role in this faith.
As noted by Eric Essono Tsimi, the case of the Grand Prix of Literary Associations is quite illustrative.
As of 13 November 2025 Players in bold are still active with Cameroon.
As of 2006, bank loans to SMEs hardly reached 15 percent of total outstanding loans (Molua, 2002).
As of 2019, fighting between separatist guerillas and government forces continues.
As of 2024, 11.957 million (41.17%) out of 29.124 million people spoke French.
As of 2025, the city and its surrounding area had an estimated population of 4,346,000, while the city proper had an estimated population of 3,816,500.
As of 2026, he is the longest serving non-royal head of state, having been in power since 30 June 1975.
As of July 2019, 2,001 kilometres of boundary (out of an estimated 2,100 kilometres) had been surveyed and agreed to by both countries, including the border at Bakassi.
As of July 2019, close to 6,000 schools had shut down across the Anglophone regions, affecting more than 600,000 children.
As of March 1998, Cameroon's fifth IMF program – a 3-year enhanced structural adjustment program approved in August 1997 – is on track.
As of May 2019, 530,000 people had been internally displaced, and 35,000 had fled to Nigeria.
As of October 2018, five such incidents had been reported, though these attacks were for the most part not lethal; one civilian death was attributed to an ADF attack.
As of September 2020, the Cameroonian government was divided on the subject of talks with the separatists, with one camp, including the prime minister, advocating a negotiated end of the war, and the other camp opposing negotiations.
As of late-2018, the Cameroonian Army aimed to control all urban areas as well as strategic points on the countryside, and did not seek to recapture the entire Anglophone regions.
As support for this argument it pointed to the Nigerian collection of taxes in the region, the widespread use of Nigerian passports by its residents, and other signs that the Nigerian state had been intimately involved in the governance of the peninsula.
As the war went on, they gradually gained limited access to some more sophisticated weapons, capturing some from the Cameroonian Army and buying some in Nigeria (where they enjoyed the support of officers in the Nigerian Army).
Aside from a traditional tendency for banks to prefer dealing with large, established companies, determining factors are also found in interest rates for loans to SMEs being capped at 15 percent and being heavily taxed.
Assemblies, secret societies, and other groups play an important role in keeping the Duala unified, helping them set goals, and giving them a venue to find solutions to common problems.
At 475,442 square kilometres (183,569 sq mi), Cameroon is the world's 53rd-largest country.
At Barcelona, Eto'o came in third for the FIFA World Player of the Year in 2005 and was twice named in the FIFA FIFPro World XI, in 2005 and 2006.
At a broader level, the family is commonly split in two depending on the reflexes of proto-Bantu tone patterns: many Bantuists group together parts of zones A through D (the extent depending on the author) as Northwest Bantu or Forest Bantu, and the remainder as Central Bantu or Savanna Bantu.
At first, Wadai paid tribute to Bornu and Durfur, but by the 18th century, Wadai was fully independent and had become an aggressor against its neighbors.
At its height it encompassed an area covering not only much of Chad, but also parts of modern eastern Niger, northeastern Nigeria, northern Cameroon and parts of South Sudan.
At least 15 people were abducted, and an unspecified number were raped.
At least 30 separatists were killed, as well as an unknown number of Cameroonian soldiers.
At least 40% of the rural population of northern and eastern Central Africa lives in poverty and routinely face chronic food shortages.
At least nine separatist fighters and at least two Cameroonian soldiers died during the fighting.
At least one person was killed.
At least some of the civilians paid ransom to secure their release.
At least three Cameroonian soldiers were reportedly killed, and one military vehicle was destroyed.
At least two people were reportedly injured in a separatist gunfire in Buea.
At least until the German period, Duala men used a kind of "drum language", tapping out coded messages to communicate news over long distances.
At present, most of the large mammals have been hunted to extinction, replaced by a large number of cattle.
At the 2003 FIFA Confederations Cup, in which Cameroon finished as runners-up, he scored his only goal in a 1–0 group stage upset of Brazil on 19 June.
At the beginning of independence, the countries surrounding Lake Chad not only had a poor economic foundation, but also had more complex ethnic, religious, and political conflicts.
At the beginning of the founding of the country, the Kanem people continued to live a nomadic life until the 11th century, when they were Islamized and settled in Njimi.
At the crossroads of West Africa and Central Africa, the territory of what is now Cameroon has seen human habitation since some time in the Middle Paleolithic, likely no later than 130,000 years ago.
At the end of 2017, the separatists declared a school boycott, and have attacked and burnt down schools that refused to shut down.
At the end of March, an ADF leader announced that they would take the war into the French-speaking parts of Cameroon.
At the end of September 2009, Eto'o demanded almost £2.75 million from Barcelona after his transfer to Inter.
At the end of the 2012–13 Russian Premier League, Eto'o made it to the Top 33 players of the Season list as the #1 Right Striker.
At the end of the season, Eto'o left Real Madrid, signing a permanent deal with Mallorca for a club record £4.4 million fee.
At the same time, the conflicts between countries and ethnic groups competing for water and land are also escalating.
At the start of the war, the separatists struggled with gaining access to firearms, having to rely on hunting rifles and in some cases single-shot pistols.
At the time of his retirement, he was regarded as the all-time topscorer from African region in FIFA World Cup finals with five goals and his record was eventually surpassed by Ghana's Asamoah Gyan.
At the time, the estuary of Wouri River was known as the Rio dos Camarões (Shrimp River).
At the top were the Wonja, native Duala, with full rights of land ownership.
At the turn of the 20th century the area of Lake Chad shrank briefly, and reached a new high in the middle of the 20th century and overflowed from the Bahr el-Ghazal again.
At this moment in time I prefer my children don't go to football matches.
At this point, the crisis began to attract international responses.
At war's end, the United Nations set in motion the decolonisation of Africa.
Attacks in Buea intensified in July, with one invasion on 1 July, another on 9 July and another on 30 July.
Attacks on gendarmes intensified, and gunmen also began to target schools to enforce a school boycott.
Attacks on schools have cost the separatists some loss of support among locals who had used to sympathize with their cause.
Audio clips - traditional music of Cameroon.
Ayaba Cho Lucas also proposed an alliance with democratic forces within Cameroon, suggesting that Ambazonia should help overthrow Paul Biya.
Ayuk Tabe listed three conditions for a ceasefire; that it would be announced by President Biya, that the Cameroonian military would pull out of the Anglophone regions, and a general amnesty for separatists.
Baguirmi emerged to the southeast of the Kanem–Bornu Empire.
Bakassi is a peninsula on the Gulf of Guinea between the Cross River estuary and the Rio del Rey estuary on the east.
Balafon orchestras had remained popular throughout the 1950s in Yaoundé's bar scene, but the audience demanded modernity, and the popular style at the time was unable to cope.
Balafon orchestras, consisting of 3-5 balafons and various percussion instruments (including the balafon, which is both a harmonic and percussive instrument) became common in the bars.
Bali, housing area located near Bonanjo administrative area.
Bamenda: Neba Publishers, 1999.
Bamiléké settlements are organized as chiefdoms.
Bamiléké settlements follow a well-organized and structured pattern.
Bangourain was attacked once more on 22 December, prompting the separatists to accuse the government of carrying out a false flag operation to incite Cameroonian Francophones.
Bantu Byways: Some Explorations among the Languages of Central and Southern Africa.
Bantu languages are largely spoken southeast of Cameroon, and throughout Central, Southern, Eastern, and Southeast Africa.
Bantu languages spread with these people along with agricultural methods and possibly iron tools, first east and then south, forming one of the largest language families in Africa.
Bantu words are typically made up of open syllables of the type CV (consonant-vowel) with most languages having syllables exclusively of this type.
Bantu-speaking groups inhabit the coastal and equatorial zones, while speakers of Semi-Bantu languages live in the Western grassfields.
Barcelona team physician Ricard Pruna originally estimated that the injury would keep him out of action for two to three months.
Barcelona went on to win the final 2–0, thus completing the Treble.
Barcelona went on to win the match 2–1, and Eto'o was awarded with the UEFA Best Forward of the Year award for his accomplishments in the European campaign.
Basel, Switzerland: Basel Mission.
Bassa is a vast area in the eastern part of the city.
Bassa people may refer to: Bassa people (Cameroon) Bassa people (Liberia) Bassa people (Nigeria)
Battles were recorded in Tadu, Bamenda, Ndop, Wum, Jakiri, Oku, Bambili, Sabga, Mamfe, Menji and Tiko.
Beadwork is an essential element of Bamileke art and distinguishes it from other regions of Africa.
Beadwork utilized all over on wooden sculptures is a technique that is unique only to the Cameroon grasslands.
Beadwork, shells, bronze, and other precious embellishments on masks elevate the mask's status.
Because Biya is a Catholic from the southern region of Cameroon, it was considered surprising that he was chosen by Ahidjo, a Muslim from the north, as his successor.
Because they were wanted by the police, UPC activists took refuge in the forests, where they formed guerilla bands; they also took refuge in neighboring British Cameroon.
Before coming under German rule in 1884, the town was also known as Cameroons Town; thereafter it became Kamerunstadt ("Cameroon City"), the capital of German Kamerun.
Before they were colonized, popular beads were obtained from Sub-Saharan countries like Nigeria and were made of shells, nuts, wood, seeds, ceramic, ivory, animal bone, and metal.
Beginning in the 1930s, football has grown to eclipse other sports in popularity.
Bell survived, but his power had diminished significantly.
Bell then found himself up against the other Duala chiefs in the Duala War, which was fought over the killing of a Bonaberi Duala and Bell's alleged refusal to share his profits with the other sub-lineages.
Below the fon and his advisers lie several ward heads, each responsible for a particular portion of the village.
Berhanemariam, Sahlesillasse, The Warrior King, 1974.
Bernard was also his personal advisor; Biya gave him an allowance of several million francs, and gave the organization itself 40 million francs for Bernard's services.
Between 13 and 19 July, the Cameroonian Army carried out raids in Awing and Pinyin, killing at least 15 separatist fighters, including a general known as "General Okoro".
Between 1884 and 1895 the city was a German protectorate.
Between 1925 and 1930, during the French colonial period, the chamber of commerce, the new palace of justice, the new railway station, the vault of the Kings Bell and the catholic cathedral of Saints Peter and Paul were built.
Between 1982 and 1984, the U.S.
Between 2015 and 2020, about 300 U.S.
Between February 2017 and May 2018, at least 42 schools were targeted.
Between May and December 1991, Douala was at the center of the civil disobedience campaign called the ghost town operation (ville morte) during which economic activities shut down to make the country ungovernable and to force the government to allow multi-partitism and freedom of expression.
Between September 2017 and February 2018, Cameroon claimed to have lost 22 soldiers and policemen in the conflict.
Beyond his speed and goalscoring, Eto'o was also known for his first touch, close control, and passing ability in his prime; even in his advancing age, he maintained his dribbling skills in his later career, which he used to his advantage to beat defenders and assist or create chances for teammates.
Bikutsi is based on a war rhythm played with various rattles and drums and xylophone.
Bikutsi originated as war music among the Ewondo.
Bikutsi's international renown continued to grow, and the song "Proof" from Paul Simon's Rhythm of the Saints, released to mainstream promotion and success in 1990, gained yet more renown from international audiences.
Bikutsi, characterized by an intense 6/8 rhythm, is played at Beti gatherings including parties, funerals, and weddings.
Biya and his party have maintained control of the presidency and the National Assembly in national elections, which rivals contend were unfair.
Biya became a naturalized citizen of France when he studied there, but he later relinquished his French citizenship when he returned to Cameroon to serve in government positions.
Biya began his administration by moving toward a more democratic government, but a failed coup d'état nudged him toward the leadership style of his predecessor.
Biya expressed his "sincere condolences" to Israeli president Isaac Herzog following the October 7 attacks in southern Israel.
Biya filed suit at the International Court of Justice on 29 March 1994.
Biya had initially seemed supportive of loosening restrictions on civil society, but the coup attempt ended any sign of opening up.
Biya has been involved in a number of European-based secret societies, among them freemasonry.
Biya initially took some steps to open up the regime, culminating in the decision to legalize opposition parties in 1990.
Biya introduced political reforms within the context of a one-party system in the 1980s, later accepting the introduction of multiparty politics in the early 1990s under serious pressure.
Biya issued a decree summoning him to return to the national side and Biya officially signed the decree requesting and compelling the coach to pick him for the World Cup squad.
Biya makes relatively few public appearances, and is sometimes characterized as aloof.
Biya pursued a diversification of Cameroonian foreign relations still more vigorously than Ahidjo had, describing his foreign policy in such terms as "diplomacy of development", "co-operation without frontiers", and "open door" diplomacy.
Biya regularly spends extended periods of time in Switzerland at the Hotel InterContinental Geneva where the former director Herbert Schott reportedly said he comes to work without being disturbed.
Biya resumed diplomatic relations with Israel in 1986, after a 13-year lapse due to the Yom Kippur War, making Cameroon one of the first African states to restore relations.
Biya survived a military coup attempt on 6 April 1984, following his decision on the previous day to disband the Republican Guard and disperse its members across the military.
Biya was brought into the CNU Central Committee and Political Bureau and was elected as the vice-president of the CNU.
Biya was inaugurated for his eighth term on 6 November as protests continued.
Biya was scheduled to leave power at the end of his term in 2011.
Biya was sworn in on 3 November.
Biya won another seven-year term in the 11 October 2004 presidential election, officially taking 70.92 percent of the vote, although the opposition again alleged widespread fraud.
Biya won the 2018 presidential election with 71.3% of the vote.
Biya won with 40% of the vote against 36 for his closest competitor and 19 for another opposition party.
Biya's Minister of Communication, Issa Tchiroma, responded by stating that anyone can use government equipment to commit false flag attacks, and said that Biya's government would investigate.
Biya's father, who was a catechist, wanted him to join the clergy, but at the age of 16 he was expelled from Catholic school.
Biya's opponent in the election, Issa Tchiroma, had fled the country to the Gambia right after his inauguration amid threats from his government.
Biya's opponents alleged wide-scale fraud in the election and procedural irregularities were noted by the French and US governments.
Biya's regime is supported by France, one of the former colonial powers in Cameroon, which supplies it with weapons and trains its military forces.
Biya, however, chose to emphasize national unity and did not focus blame on northern Muslims.
Biya, the incumbent president, has led the country since 1982 following Ahidjo's resignation; he previously held office as prime minister from 1975 onward.
Black Theatre: a periodical of the black theatre movement, New York: 1994 Gordon, April A., and Donald L.
Bleek's identification was inspired by the anthropological observation of groups frequently self-identifying as "people" or "the true people" (as is the case, for example, with the term Khoikhoi, but this is a kare "praise address" and not an ethnic name).
Bleek, and later Carl Meinhof, pursued extensive studies comparing the grammatical structures of Bantu languages.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Boko Haram launched several attacks into Cameroon, killing 84 civilians in a December 2014 raid, but suffering a heavy defeat in a raid in January 2015.
Bonaberi is located on the right bank of the Wouri River.
Bonanjo is the administrative neighborhood, with many large administrations, larger companies and banks offices, with higher buildings than the rest of the city Bonamoussadi is the main housing area located in the northern part of the city.
Bonapriso is one of the wealthiest area of the city and even of the country.
Bony suffered an injury, but Eto'o later apologized for the altercation, offering to pay Bony's medical expenses.
Both monogamous and polygamous marriage are practised, and the average Cameroonian family is large and extended.
Both results caused Cameroon to qualify for the 2010 World Cup finals, held in South Africa.
Both sides have used WhatsApp to spread propaganda.
Breakfast consists of leftovers of bread and fruit with coffee or tea.
Breast ironing, a traditional practice that is prevalent in Cameroon, may affect girls' health.
Brenda Biya, who is also a LGBTQ activist, publicly revealed her same-sex relationship with Brazilian model Layyons Valença on 5 July 2024.
Britain ceded the area to the German territory of Kamerun in 1887.
Britain offered German owned plantations to the highest bidder with the intent of paying the proceeds into a World War I reparations account.
Britain's territory, a strip bordering Nigeria from the sea to Lake Chad, with a roughly equal population was ruled from Lagos as part of Nigeria, known as Cameroons (British Cameroons).
Brittle Paper, an online platform founded by Ainehi Edoro, has been described as "Africa's leading literary journal".
Buea became the capital of West Cameroon while Yaounde doubled as the federal capital and East Cameroonian capital.
Buffalo masks are also very popular and present at most functions throughout Grassland societies, including the Bamileke.
Builders then stuff the resulting holes with grass and cover the whole building with mud.
Building artificial intelligence for Cameroon languages is an important goal.
Busby, Margaret (ed.), Daughters of Africa: An International Anthology of Words and Writings by Women of African Descent from the Ancient Egyptian to the Present, Jonathan Cape, 1992.
Bushmeat, long a staple food for rural Cameroonians, is a delicacy in the country's urban centres.
Businesses were shut down and motor parks were closed as well.
But few investors were willing to buy at the London auctions.
But in contemporary decolonial South African linguistics, the term Ntu languages is used.
But like I said, I am happy here.
By 1650, it had become the site of a town formed by immigrants, said to have arrived from Congo, who spoke the Duala language.
By 1800 BC, a pottery culture known as Gajiganna had emerged, initially as pastoralists, but, starting around 1500 BC, living in settled hamlets at the side of the lake.
By 1875, numerous missions and schools sprung up in Douala and other settlements.
By 2004, Nigeria had failed to meet the deadline to hand over the peninsula.
By 2019, annual tax revenues in the Anglophone regions had dropped from US$800,000 to US$1,000, and by 2020 almost all tax officials had fled their crossing posts on the Nigerian border.
By 2024, Northwest Region had become the second most dangerous administrative division in Africa for civilians, with only Gezira State in Sudan being more dangerous.
By August 2018, more than 180,000 people had been displaced due to the war.
By February 2020, between 800 and 1,000 Cameroonian soldiers had been killed.
By January 2018, 15,000 people had fled from Southern Cameroons to Nigeria.
By June 2017, protests in Cameroon's English-speaking provinces and cities led to police responding with force, with four protesters killed and more than 100 arrested.
By June, Cameroonian military and police casualties were estimated to be around 500 dead.
By March 2025, Africa Confidential assessed that the Anglophone Crisis had remained a "bloody stalemate", with neither the government nor the rebels in a position to win the conflict.
By May, at least 44 soldiers and policemen had been killed.
By November 2020, the separatists' manufacturing of weapons within the Anglophone regions had become a serious problem for Cameroon.
By October 2018, the military and police had lost at least 175 servicemen.
By October, the conflict had spread to most of Southern Cameroons.
By now, the war had fully extended to Buea, with separatists mounting road blocks and attacking government soldiers on 29 June.
By the 15th century CE, the farming Bakongo people (ba being the plural prefix) were unified as the Kingdom of Kongo under a ruler called the manikongo, residing in the fertile Pool Malebo area on the lower Congo River.
By the 16th century, the manikongo held authority from the Atlantic in the west to the Kwango River in the east.
By the 1940s, many Duala had attained prominence as builders, as well, servicing the growing cities of Douala and Victoria.
By the 1980s, makossa had moved to Paris and a new pop-makossa fused elements of Antillean zouk.
By the 5th century AD camels were being used for trans-Saharan trade via the Fezzan, or to the east via Darfur.
By the early 1930s, the Duala were a minority in the town named for them.
By the end of 2017, several separatist militias had emerged, with the ADF standing out as the most prominent one.
By the end of June, The Africa Report reported that Cameroon had largely pushed the separatists out of Buea (although they later clashed with the army there in early-July), where there had been much fighting back in 2018.
By the end of May, Cameroon had also retaken Belo, though fighting continued around the town, which was almost completely abandoned by its inhabitants.
By the late 16th century the Bornu empire had expanded and recaptured the parts of Kanem that had been conquered by the Bulala.
By the mid-19th century, the British had taken the lead in trade with the Duala.
By the second decade of the 20th century, Lake Chad had been colonized and occupied by Britain, France, and Germany, defining boundaries that are largely intact with the present post-colonial states.
By the summer of 2019, the government controlled the major cities and parts of the countryside, while the Ambazonian nationalists held parts of the countryside and regularly appeared in the major cities.
Bépanda is a very densely populated neighbourhood.
Cameroon Cuisine of Cameroon Languages of Cameroon Music of Cameroon List of writers from Cameroon "Revue Noire" - Special Issue on Cameroon, n.
Cameroon History for Secondary Schools and Colleges.
Cameroon News Agency reported that a group known as the "Tigers of Manyu" was responsible for the attack, and had carried it out as revenge for the death of one of their fighters two days prior.
Cameroon Transport in Cameroon United Nations Economic Commission for Africa Cameroon latest trade data on ITC Trade Map World Bank Summary Trade Statistics Cameroon
Cameroon aims at becoming emerging by 2035.
Cameroon also launched a series of operations in Mezam, Boyo, Donga Mantung, Bui, Ngo Ketunjia and Boyo that would, over six days, force around 5,500 people to flee their homes.
Cameroon and Nigeria share a 1,000-mile (1,600 km) border and have disputed the sovereignty of the Bakassi peninsula.
Cameroon announced in September 2018 that Boko Haram had been repelled, but the conflict persists in the northern border areas nonetheless.
Cameroon as a political entity emerged from the colonization of Africa by Europeans.
Cameroon became a German colony in 1884 known as Kamerun.
Cameroon became an oil-producing country in 1977.
Cameroon claimed that at least five separatists were killed, while the separatists claimed to have suffered three dead.
Cameroon claimed to have suffered one dead and one wounded during the battles.
Cameroon controls 12 nautical miles of the Atlantic Ocean.
Cameroon culture consists of numerous religions including Christianity (about 70%), Islam (about 30%), and many other indigenous religions.
Cameroon declared victory over Boko Haram on Cameroonian territory in September 2018.
Cameroon defeated defending champions Argentina in the opening game 1–0 with a goal scored by François Omam-Biyik.
Cameroon eventually lost the game 2–1 and was eliminated from the World Cup.
Cameroon failed to advance from their group, however, as they finished third behind Brazil and Switzerland, respectively.
Cameroon gained independence from France and Britain in 1960 and 1961.
Cameroon had three players sent off in the course of the tournament, more than any other team.
Cameroon has 250-300 distinct groups and an estimated 300+ languages.
Cameroon has a growing technology sector in cities like Yaounde and Douala.
Cameroon has a high level of religious freedom and diversity.
Cameroon has a rich and diverse culture made up of a mix of about 250 indigenous populations and just as many languages and customs.
Cameroon has a rich cultural heritage with diverse ethnic groups.
Cameroon has a young and growing population with great potential.
Cameroon has an investment guaranty agreement and a bilateral accord with the United States.
Cameroon has deployed additional troops to the cities, while separatists have warned the Confederation of African Football against holding the tournament.
Cameroon has four patterns of drainage.
Cameroon has had only two presidents since independence and while opposition parties were legalized in 1990 only one party has ever governed.
Cameroon has its GDP growing at an average of 4% per year.
Cameroon has maintained close relations with France and allied itself largely with Western political and economic interests throughout the Cold War and into the twenty-first century.
Cameroon has many water bodies and amongst these are two major rivers, the Sanaga, the longest at about 525 km (325 miles) long and the Wouri, the largest.
Cameroon has many water bodies and amongst these are two major rivers, the Sanaga, the longest at about 525 km long and the Wouri, the largest.
Cameroon has one of the highest school attendance rates in Africa.
Cameroon has produced multiple National Basketball Association players including Pascal Siakam, Joel Embiid, D.
Cameroon has received some international attention following the relative success of its football team.
Cameroon has rescheduled its Paris Club debt at favorable terms.
Cameroon has slightly more women (50.5%) than men (49.5%).
Cameroon has voted against several anti-Israel UN resolutions, and was the only nation to join Israel in voting against the UN resolution "Assistance to Palestine Refugees".
Cameroon has won five African Cup of Nations titles and the gold medal at the 2000 Olympics.
Cameroon is a country in Central Africa with over 280 languages.
Cameroon is a member of both the Commonwealth of Nations and La Francophonie.
Cameroon is a predominantly Francophone country, though English is the official language of Southern Cameroons.
Cameroon is an important breeding area for marine and freshwater species such as crustaceans, mollusks, fish, and birds.
Cameroon is divided into five major geographic zones distinguished by dominant physical, climatic, and vegetative features.
Cameroon is divided into several provinces, which are dominated by specific ethnic or religious groups.
Cameroon is governed as a unitary presidential republic.
Cameroon is home to at least 250 languages, with some accounts reporting around 600.
Cameroon is home to nearly 250 languages or dialects.
Cameroon is known as Africa in miniature due to its diverse geography.
Cameroon is one of the few tropical countries to have competed in the Winter Olympics.
Cameroon is part of the Bank of Central African States (of which it is the dominant economy), the Customs and Economic Union of Central Africa (UDEAC) and the Organization for the Harmonization of Business Law in Africa (OHADA).
Cameroon is the first and, as of 2022, only African country to win against Brazil in tournament play, defeating them in the 2003 Confederations Cup and 2022 FIFA World Cup by identical 1–0 scores.
Cameroon is viewed as rife with corruption at all levels of government.
Cameroon is well known for its native music styles, particularly Makossa, Njang, and Bikutsi, and its successful national football team.
Cameroon later defeated Romania 2–1 and lost to the Soviet Union 0–4, becoming the first side to top a World Cup Finals group with a negative goal difference.
Cameroon led the group until their final game, when Pierre Womé failed to convert a late penalty.
Cameroon lies between latitudes 1° and 13°N, and longitudes 8° and 17°E.
Cameroon only has a limited number of mine-protected armored vehicles, and IED attacks have been getting increasingly sophisticated (including remote detonation).
Cameroon played its first match against Belgian Congo in 1956, losing 3–2.
Cameroon possesses substantial mineral resources, but these are not extensively mined (see Mining in Cameroon).
Cameroon produces cocoa, coffee, cotton and timber for export.
Cameroon qualified along with Nigeria and Morocco.
Cameroon qualified for its first FIFA World Cup in 1982.
Cameroon qualified for the 1990 World Cup by surpassing Nigeria and beating Tunisia in the final round playoff.
Cameroon qualified for the 2002 World Cup in Korea-Japan, clinching first place in their group which included Angola, Zambia and Togo.
Cameroon qualified for the 2022 World Cup in Qatar via the away goals rule after defeating hosts Algeria 2–1 on 29 March 2022 thanks to Karl Toko Ekambi's winner in the 124th minute of the second leg of their CAF third round home-and-away tie with The Fennec Foxes.
Cameroon relies heavily on France for its defence, although military spending is high in comparison to other sectors of government.
Cameroon sent reinforcements to stop the celebrations, and clashes were reported in Bui, Momo and Boyo.
Cameroon shares borders with Nigeria, Chad, Central African Republic, Congo, Gabon and Equatorial Guinea.
Cameroon started the 2002 African Cup of Nations competition with a 1–0 win over DR Congo.
Cameroon started the 2017 Africa Cup of Nations competition with a 1–1 draw to Burkina Faso, followed by a 2–1 win against Guinea-Bissau, and an unconvincing goalless draw against the hosts Gabon.
Cameroon started with a 1–1 draw with Ireland after giving up the lead and later defeated Saudi Arabia 1–0.
Cameroon state radio and television later reported that the blast lasted only a couple of seconds and lightly injured two porters and guides.
Cameroon subsequently carried out an offensive in Ngo-Ketunjia, where it claimed to have destroyed 10 separatist camps and killed at least 20 fighters, including some of those who had participated in the Galim raid.
Cameroon subsequently defeated Turkey and drew the USA before dispatching Colombia in the semi-final.
Cameroon turned to foreign aid, cut government spending, and privatised industries.
Cameroon used sleeveless Puma shirts at the 2002 African Cup of Nations in Mali, which they won for the fourth time.
Cameroon was a source of slaves for the slave trade.
Cameroon was drawn into Group 1 with Italy, Poland, and Peru.
Cameroon was one of 53 countries that, in June 2020, backed the Hong Kong national security law at the United Nations.
Cameroon was ranked 116th in the Global Innovation Index in 2025.
Cameroon was the host country of the Women Africa Cup of Nations in November–December 2016, the 2020 African Nations Championship and the 2021 Africa Cup of Nations.
Cameroon went out with three draws from their three first-round games.
Cameroon were drawn into Group B with Italy, Chile and Austria.
Cameroon were drawn into Group E alongside Germany, the Republic of Ireland and Saudi Arabia.
Cameroon were eliminated in the quarter-finals of the 2006 Africa Cup of Nations after Eto'o missed the decisive penalty in a 12–11 penalty shootout loss to Ivory Coast following a 1–1 draw, but he nonetheless finished as the top scorer of the tournament with five goals.
Cameroon were knocked out in the group stages; however, Milla scored a goal against Russia, setting a record as the oldest goalscorer in a World Cup tournament, breaking the record he had set in 1990.
Cameroon would defeat hosts Mali 3–0 in the semi-final on 7 February on route to repeating as champions by edging Senegal 3–2 on penalties following a scoreless 120 minutes on 13 February, and thereby qualifying for the 2003 Confederations Cup in France.
Cameroon's GHI score is 18.3, which is considered moderate.
Cameroon's claim to Bakassi was largely based on the Anglo-German agreement of 1913 and the 1975 Maroua Declaration.
Cameroon's financial system is the largest in the CEMAC region.
Cameroon's first president, Ahmadou Ahidjo, was in power from 1960 to 1982.
Cameroon's highest point, at almost 4,100 metres (13,500 ft), is Mount Cameroon in the Southwest Region.
Cameroon's legal system is a mixture of civil law, common law, and customary law.
Cameroon's most populous cities are Douala on the Wouri River, its economic capital and main seaport; Yaoundé, its political capital; and Garoua.
Cameroon's per capita GDP (Purchasing power parity) was estimated at US$5.760 in 2025.
Cameroon's population is almost evenly divided between urban and rural dwellers.
Cameroon's population of nearly 31 million people speak 250 native languages, in addition to the national tongues of English and French.
Cameroon's relatively large and diverse population is also diverse with respect to its contemporary fashion.
Cameroon's relatively large and diverse population is likewise diverse in its fashions.
Cameroon's strategy of prioritizing urban areas began to yield results during the first half of 2020; by June, the separatists had been largely pushed out of Buea.
Cameroon's western region is split into four smaller regions: the Littoral (Littoral) and South-West (Sud-Ouest) regions are on the coast, and the North-West (Nord-Ouest) and West (Ouest) regions are in the western grassfields.
Cameroon's wildlife is composed of its flora and fauna.
Cameroon, Niger, Nigeria, and Chad established the Lake Chad Basin Commission on 22 May 1964.
Cameroon, officially the Republic of Cameroon, is a country in Central Africa.
Cameroonian Army reinforcements failed to arrive before the separatists had already withdrawn back across the river.
Cameroonian General Melingui stated that the separatists have a leverage over the army when it comes to familiarity with the battleground; "They know the terrain.
Cameroonian Pidgin English began to develop at this time.
Cameroonian Pidgin English is the lingua franca in the formerly British-administered territories.
Cameroonian audiences preferred more roots-based performers like Jimmy Mvondo Mvelé and Uta Bella, both from Yaoundé.
Cameroonian authorities confirmed Wazizi's death three days after the initial reports, reiterated the original accusation against Wazizi, and attributed his death to "severe sepsis".
Cameroonian authorities have arrested journalists on the accusation of propagating false information, the punishment for which is six months to two years in prison.
Cameroonian casualties spiked in 2021, as separatists were becoming increasingly well-armed.
Cameroonian cuisine includes dishes like ndole, eru, and koki.
Cameroonian cuisine is one of the most varied in Africa due to Cameroon's location on the crossroads between the north, west, and center of the continent; the diversity in ethnicity with mixture ranging from Bantus, Bamileke people, Bamoun, Bamenda people and Shuwa Arabs, as well as the influence of German, French and British colonization.
Cameroonian forces were able to retrieve the body three days later.
Cameroonian kings held together.
Cameroonian literature has concentrated on both European and African themes.
Cameroonian literature includes literature in French, English and indigenous languages.
Cameroonian society is male-dominated, and violence and discrimination against women are common.
Cameroonian soldiers summarily executed two people on 14 September, and another five civilians days later.
Cameroun: Guide touristique (in French).
Cameroun: la culture sacrifiée.
Camfranglais (or Frananglais) is a relatively new pidgin communication form emerging in urban areas and other locations where Anglophone and Francophone Cameroonians meet and interact.
Caps and goals correct as of 31 March 2026, after the match against China.
Caterina Batello; Marzio Marzot; Adamou Harouna Touré (2004).
Cattle are the most important livestock raised, as well as poultry, goats, sheep, camels, horses, and donkeys.
Celebrations were also held in Lebialem.
Central Africa (French: Afrique centrale; Spanish: África central; Portuguese: África Central) is a subregion of the African continent comprising various countries according to different definitions.
Central Africa also includes many Nilo-Saharan and Niger-Congo Ubangian communities: in north western Central Africa the Nilo-Saharan Kanuri predominate.
Certain protestors had called upon Biya and the Cameroonian government to grant them independence.
Chad is the only country in the region where Islam in the majority religion.
Chad, Gabon, the Republic of the Congo, and the Central African Republic became autonomous states with the dissolution of French Equatorial Africa in 1958, gaining full independence in 1960.
Chapman, Graham; Baker, Kathleen M.
Chief among these is the Ngondo, an assembly of important chiefs.
Chiefs and headmen sat at the pinnacle of this hierarchy in the past, though today such figures have very little power in their own right.
Chinese foreign minister Wang Yi visited Cameroon on 12 January 2014.
Christian missionaries established a presence in the late nineteenth century.
Christianity is the majority religion in Cameroon, with significant minorities practising Islam and traditional faiths.
Citing eyewitness accounts, videos and photos as evidence, the Centre claimed that 71 of these villages had been completely destroyed and depopulated, while the remaining 34 had been partially deserted.
Civil servants' salaries were reduced by 60%, and the informal sector increased very significantly.
Civilians and activists have accused Biya's government forces of burning villages, raping women, extrajudicial killings of civilians, and acts of genocide.
Claiming to want to make reserves for difficult times, the authorities manage "off-budget" oil revenues in total opacity (the funds are placed in Paris, Switzerland and New York accounts).
Clashes ensued, and many villagers fled across the border into the villages of Bashu and Danare in Boki, Cross River State.
Clashes took place in Buea and Muyuka, where separatists burned down the office of the Divisional Officer.
Climate, religious, ethnic and cultural belief systems as well as influences from colonialism, imperialism and globalization are all reflected in the clothes worn by modern Cameroonians.
Climate, religious, ethnic, and cultural beliefs, and the influences of colonialism, imperialism, and globalisation are all factors in contemporary Cameroonian dresses.
Coetzee (South Africa) in 2003, Doris Lessing (UK/Zimbabwe) in 2007, and Abdulrazak Gurnah (Tanzania) in 2021.
Coffee is a major cash crop in the western highlands, and in the north, natural conditions favour crops such as cotton, groundnuts, and rice.
Collins, Robert O.; Burns, James M.
Colonial officials and businessmen preferred them as inexpensive clerks to German government offices and firms in Africa.
Colonial-era writers such as Louis-Marie Pouka and Sankie Maimo were educated by European missionary societies and advocated assimilation into European culture to bring Cameroon into the modern world.
Colonization and trade routes with other countries in Europe and the Middle East introduced brightly colored glass beads as well as pearls, coral and rare stones like emeralds.
Colorful, beaded masks are donned at special events such as funerals, important palace festivals and other royal ceremonies.
Combined with the end of legal slave imports in the United States the same year, the international slave trade in Cameroon declined sharply.
Common themes include the clash between past and present, tradition and modernity, self and community, and politics and development.
Compared with older Mount Cameroon lavas, the 1999 and 2000 basanites have elevated Nb and K2O contents and plot on a mixing trend with the 1959 and 1982 lavas.
Competition escalated between coastal groups and even between related settlements.
Consequently, it handles most of the country's major exports, such as oil, cocoa and coffee, timber, metals and fruits.
Considered a political prisoner and prisoner of conscience by the United States Department of State, Amnesty International, Freedom House, and the U.N.
Constructed by the multinational road construction company SOGEA SATOM and financed by the Cameroonian government and a loan from the French government, this bridge will help decongest traffic on the first bridge.
Constructions were intensified between 1930 and 1955 and in 1955 the bridge on Wouri River was built.
Contemporary art is mainly promoted by independent cultural organisations (Doual'art, Africréa) and artist-run initiatives (Art Wash, Atelier Viking, ArtBakery).
Continuing his outstanding form in Serie A and in the Champions League for the 2010–11 campaign, he was pivotal to Inter's attack line.
Councils of elders and secret societies allow communities to decide important issues.
Cricket has also entered into Cameroon as an emerging sport with the Cameroon Cricket Federation participating in international matches.
Criticism of the suspension and increased opposition led to resumption of services in late April.
Critics included government officials who remained anonymous, fearing a backlash.
Crop production based on rain is possible only in the southern belt.
Cuisine varies by region, but a large, one-course, evening meal is common throughout the country.
Currently, ten percent of them are neglected, and seven percent of them are considered as threatened.
Curries, soups and fish dishes are common, as well as meats on skewers.
Cutlery is common, but food is traditionally manipulated with the right hand.
Dakar - Outpost of Two Hemispheres.
Days later, the Cameroonian government announced it was ready for an "inclusive" dialogue where anything except Ambazonian independence could be discussed.
Days later, the Cameroonian government announced that the BIR had identified and killed a separatist commander who was responsible for the massacre.
DeLancey, Mark W., and DeLancey, Mark Dike (2000): Historical Dictionary of the Republic of Cameroon (3rd ed.).
DeLancey, and Rebecca Neh Mbuh.
Death is always met with mystery, and the family is required to turn the body over to an examiner to determine the cause of death.
Debundscha List of volcanoes in Cameroon Mount Cameroon Research Foundation
December saw more burning of houses by government soldiers in Romajia, Kikiakom and Ekona.
Deido is a historical neighborhood located in the north central part of the city.
Derrick, Jonathan/ "The 'Germanophone' Elite of Douala under the French Mandate." Journal of African History (1980): 255-267 online.
Despite Cameroon being the original homeland of the Bantu people, the great medieval Bantu-speaking kingdoms arose elsewhere, such as what is now Kenya, Congo, Angola, and South Africa.
Despite a relatively favorable draw for the qualifiers, which included Namibia, Burundi, and Kenya (the latter eliminated due to administrative interference), the Cameroonian team faced significant challenges.
Despite being unbeaten, they failed to qualify for the second round, having scored fewer goals than Italy.
Despite drawing with Chile and Austria (after leading 1–0 against them until the 90th minute), a 3–0 defeat to Italy saw Cameroon finish bottom of the group.
Despite government offensives in September, the separatists remained in control of many rural and urban areas.
Despite losing some of his speed with age, he continued to maintain a consistent goalscoring rate as a striker, due to his ability to get into good positions and time his attacking runs, as shown by his goal in a 6–3 loss against Chelsea on 30 August 2014, during his time with Everton.
Despite previous good relations, in 1983 a rift was apparent between Biya and Ahidjo.
Despite some skepticism, health experts emphasize careful community outreach to combat vaccine hesitancy and stress the importance of using existing preventive measures alongside vaccines.
Die Verwandtschaftsverhältnisse der Bantusprachen [The relationships between the Bantu languages].
Differences in mantle signature between the eastern and western flanks of the volcano support a mantle origin for the Cameroon Volcanic Line.
Dinka was incarcerated the following January without trial.
Directly south of them are the Centre (Centre) and East (Est).
Dishes are often quite spicy; seasonings include salt, red pepper sauce, and maggi.
Djérem River has a total length of 464.5 km (288.6 mi) and Lom River a total length of 424.2 km (263.6 mi).
Djérem is the longest source of Sanaga River with a total length of 464.5 km.
Doctors and nurses who were trained in Cameroon emigrate because in Cameroon the payment is poor while the workload is high.
Dossier of the magazine "Africultures", n.
Douala Maritime Museum, a museum showcasing the rich maritime history of Douala.
Douala became the major economic city.
Douala features a tropical monsoon climate (Köppen climate classification Am), with relatively consistent temperatures throughout the course of the year, though the city experiences somewhat cooler temperatures in July and August.
Douala has a fairly developed road network compared to other cities in Cameroon.
Douala has an aviation school called CAE Oxford Aviation Academy Douala.
Douala is a city with a modest oil resource in Africa, but is in excellent agricultural condition, therefore it has one of best economies in Africa.
Douala is linked by rail to Yaoundé, Ngaoundéré, Kumba and Nkongsamba.
Douala is the country's principal seaport and Kribi Deepwater Port started operations in 2014.
Douala is the largest city and economic capital of Cameroon.
Douala is the largest city in Cameroon and its economic capital.
Douala is the largest city in Cameroon.
Douala is their traditional capital, and many Duala live in and around the city, although today it has come to reflect the diversity of Cameroon as a whole.
Douala sees plentiful rainfall during the course of the year, experiencing on average roughly 3,600 millimetres (140 in) of precipitation per year.
Douala then had a population of around 500,000.
Douala typically features warm and humid conditions with an average annual temperature of 27.0 °C (80.6 °F) and an average humidity of 83%.
Douala, Yaoundé, and Garoua are the largest cities.
Douala, croissance et servitudes.
Dry climate due to vegetation loss from overgrazing and deforestation and large-scale irrigation projects that diverted water from the rivers that feed the lake are the main reasons for the shrinkage of Lake Chad.
Duala Manga Bell had many allies.
Duala inheritance is patrilineal; upon the father's death, his property is split among his male heirs.
Duala is also spoken by a great part of the Bakoko people.
Duala is part of the Niger–Congo language family.
Duala is used as a trade languages, due largely to the spread of the tongue by early missionaries.
Due to common historical processes and widespread demographic movements between the countries of Central Africa before the Bantu Migration into much of southern Central Africa, the cultures of the region evidence many similarities and interrelationships.
Due to competition in his position with more experienced players, he had several loan spells, before signing for Mallorca in 2000 where he scored 70 goals, a club record.
Due to financial cuts in the health care system, there are few professionals.
Due to his advanced age, there has been ongoing speculation about his health and potential succession.
Due to his performances in Italy, he was once again named African Footballer of the Year.
Due to its strategic position at the crossroads between West Africa and Central Africa, it has been categorized as being in both geostrategic locations.
Due to the escalation, a government-led effort to reopen at least 4,500 schools by 2 September ultimately failed.
Due to the increasingly arid climate, the lake surface gradually shrank.
Due to the lack of teachers, burned schools and the unsafe feeling of going to school, many Anglophones lost years of school.
Durham: Duke University Press.
During 2016 and 2017, under Biya's reign, large scale protests broke out among Anglophone Cameroonians in the area of the formerly British Southern Cameroons.
During 2020, numerous terrorist attacks—many of them carried out without claims of credit—and government reprisals have led to bloodshed throughout the country.
During World War II, the French and British showed favouritism toward white-owned plantations, and many Duala-owned farms became unprofitable .
During bikutsi, women dance and sing along with the balafon, and lyrics focus on real-life problems, as well as sexual fantasies.
During in-active times, seismicity rarely exceeds magnitude 3 with depths around surface level to about 60 km (37 mi).
During the 17th century, a Lunda chief and warrior called Mwata Kazembe set up an Eastern Lunda kingdom in the valley of the Luapula River.
During the 18th century it was the center of the transatlantic slave trade.
During the 1950s, bars sprang up across the city to accommodate the influx of new inhabitants and soon became a symbol for Cameroonian identity in the face of colonialism.
During the 19th century, the Shilluk Kingdom faced decline following military assaults from the Ottoman Empire and later British and Sudanese colonization in Anglo-Egyptian Sudan.
During the 2004–2008 period, public debt was reduced from over 60% of GDP to 10% and official reserves quadrupled to over US$3 billion.
During the African humid period, the lake's area reached 400,000 km2 (150,000 sq mi).
During the Berlin Conference in 1884–1885, Africa was divided between the European colonial powers.
During the Conference of Berlin in 1884–85 Africa was divided up between the European colonial powers, defining boundaries that are largely intact with today's post-colonial states.
During the colonial period, parts of the Bamileke region adopted Christianity, though some of them practice Islam.
During the first months after Biya's succession, he continued to show loyalty to Ahidjo, and Ahidjo continued to show support for Biya, but in 1983, a deep rift developed between the two.
During the four days of fighting, the Cameroonian Army lifted a blockade of the Bamenda-Enugu Road, where rebels had extorted money from travellers.
During the guerrilla campaign in Manyu and Mezam, it had clashed with the army 13 times.
During the homegoing celebration of King Njoya's mother in 1913, elephant masks were worn by those in attendance.
During the intervening years, Ahidjo used emergency powers granted due to the war and the fear of further ethnic conflict to consolidate power.
During the latter part of the 1660s, the Portuguese tried to gain control of Kongo.
During the offensive, the ADF carried out guerrilla attacks on the Cameroonian Army, killing at least seven soldiers throughout December.
During the return leg of the Champions League semi-final match against his former club Barcelona, Eto'o further demonstrated his work-rate and versatility by playing as a makeshift right-sided attacking full-back or wing-back following Thiago Motta's controversial sending-off.
During this operation, two key members of the "Only Bro" group were neutralized.
During this period, African plays written in English began to emerge.
During this period, Lake Chad shrunk considerably and fluctuated in the range of 2,000 to 5,000 km2 (770 to 1,930 sq mi) thereafter.
During this time, Anglophone separatists claim that government forces murdered protestors en masse, and committed crimes against humanity, including genocide.
Dwellings of materials such as cement and tin are increasingly common.
Each member must step up to the totem and swear that they were not involved in the death of the loved one.
Each noun belongs to a class, and each language may have several numbered classes, somewhat like grammatical gender in European languages.
Each region is headed by a presidentially appointed governor.
Each territory was assigned a mani-mpembe (provincial governor) by the manikongo.
Early Duala history may only be conjectured from oral traditions.
Early March saw two serious kidnapping incidents; one on the Kumba-Buea Highway, which was quickly foiled by the BIR, and one at the University of Buea, where more than 15 students were kidnapped, beaten and released.
Early inhabitants of the territory included the Sao civilisation around Lake Chad and the Baka hunter-gatherers in the southeastern rainforest.
Education for the deaf in Cameroon uses American Sign Language, introduced by the deaf American missionary Andrew Foster.
Education is highly valued in Cameroonian society.
Efforts by the Cameroonian government to prevent a repeat of the debacle surrounding the 2018 presidential election ultimately failed, as the turnout in the Anglophone regions was very low.
Efforts have recently been made to renovate the city's roads, especially in the most deprived neighborhoods.
Eight days later, a successful guerrilla attack killed two gendarmes and wounded a brigade commander in Zhoa in Wum, Northwest Region.
Eight days later, he scored his first UEFA Champions League goal for the team in the final Group F match against Rubin Kazan to help Inter win 2–0 at home and progress to the knockout stage as runner-ups.
Eight out of the ten regions of Cameroon are primarily francophone and two are anglophone.
Ekambi Brillant and the first major Cameroonian hit, "N'Gon Abo," set the stage for the development of makossa.
Elections were held in 1954 and the parliament met on 1 October 1954, with E.
Elsewhere in Bamenda, separatist fighters killed a police officer.
Encounter, transformation and identity: peoples of the western Cameroon borderlands, 1891-2000 (Berghahn Books, 2009) online.
Endeley was defeated in elections on 1 February 1959 by John Ngu Foncha.
Endemic diseases include dengue fever, filariasis, leishmaniasis, malaria, meningitis, schistosomiasis, and sleeping sickness.
Endonymically, the term for cultural objects, including language, is formed with the ki- noun class (Nguni ísi-), as in KiSwahili (Swahili language and culture), IsiZulu (Zulu language and culture) and KiGanda (Ganda religion and culture).
England, however, equalized in the 83rd minute with a penalty from Gary Lineker, while Lineker again found the net via a 105th-minute penalty to make the eventual scoreline 3–2 for England.
English and French are the two official languages of Cameroon.
English and Swahili are official languages.
English explorer Mary Kingsley, one of the first Europeans to scale the mountain, recounts her expedition in her 1897 memoir Travels in West Africa.
Equatorial Guinea gained independence from Spain in 1968, leading to the election of Francisco Macías Nguema, now widely regarded as one of the most brutal dictators in history.
Equatorial rainforest dominates this region, although its alternation between wet and dry seasons makes it less humid than the coast.
Eru or nfoh and water fufu Eru is a vegetable soup made up of finely shredded leaves of the eru.
Estimates of the death toll ranged from 71 (according to the government) to about 1,000.
Ethnic divisions often correspond to geography, which is also widely varied.
Ethnically Beti, Paul Biya was born in the village of Mvomeka'a in what is now the South Region of Cameroon.
Ethnologue page on Languages of Cameroon PanAfriL10n page on Cameroon Aménagement linguistique dans le monde - Cameroun Leinyui, Usmang Salle.
Ethnologue separates the largely mutually intelligible Kinyarwanda and Kirundi, which together have 20 million speakers.
Eto'o also scored in two consecutive away wins against his former club Real Madrid: the first, a 1–5 thrashing, the only home loss of the Madrilenian club who went to win the 2002-03 La Liga.; the second ended with a 2–3 result that denied a back-to-back La Liga win for Real.
Eto'o also won an historic third consecutive African Player of the Year award that season.
Eto'o announced his retirement from international football in August 2014.
Eto'o continued his good form after scoring another early goal, in the fifth minute, against Arsenal on 22 March.
Eto'o continued to be a protagonist for Inter in Europe, netting the winner in the second leg of 2009–10 UEFA Champions League round of 16 against Chelsea on 16 March 2010, which allowed Inter to progress to the quarter-finals.
Eto'o delivered an emotional locker room speech on January 9, 2026, following Cameroon's 2-0 quarterfinal loss to Morocco at the Africa Cup of Nations.
Eto'o departed Mallorca as the club's all-time leading domestic league scorer (54 goals) when he signed for Barcelona in the summer of 2004 for a transfer fee of €24 million, after lengthy, three-way negotiations with Mallorca and Madrid.
Eto'o described it as the biggest disappointment of his career.
Eto'o earned his first cap with Cameroon one day before his 16th birthday on 9 March 1997, in a 5–0 friendly loss to Costa Rica.
Eto'o experienced racial abuse in some away matches during his career.
Eto'o had a blistering start to the season, scoring 13 goals in his first 15 games, and was named the interim player-manager for the team after the previous coach, Yusuf Şimşek, was sacked on 7 December.
Eto'o has also been renowned for his leadership, opportunism and mentality throughout his career.
Eto'o has four children: Maelle, Étienne, Siena and Lynn.
Eto'o has participated in four World Cups and six Africa Cup of Nations.
Eto'o is a native of Nkon, a suburb of Yaoundé.
Eto'o later declared that the punishment was insufficient and that La Romareda should have been closed for at least one year, but his manager Frank Rijkaard, of Surinamese origin, told him to concentrate on football and stop talking about the incident.
Eto'o made his Barcelona debut in the season opener at Racing de Santander on 29 August 2004.
Eto'o made his debut for Anzhi on 27 August 2011 against Rostov when he came on as a substitute with 30 minutes left in the game, later scoring an equalizer in the 80th minute from a cross by Yuri Zhirkov.
Eto'o recorded his first league hat-trick in a match against Levante on 24 February 2008.
Eto'o refused to come on as a substitute in a league match against Racing de Santander on 11 February 2007.
Eto'o scored again on 13 September against Parma, his first goal from open play in a Serie A match.
Eto'o scored his 30th goal of the 2008–09 season in a La Liga match against Real Valladolid.
Eto'o scored his first Serie A brace on 29 October during a 5–3 win over Palermo, with Mario Balotelli also scoring twice.
Eto'o scored his sole goal of the 2002 FIFA World Cup when he netted the game-winner against Saudi Arabia during the group stage on 6 June 2002, which was Cameroon's only win of the competition.
Eto'o scored in the World Cup qualification match against Morocco to win Cameroon a spot in the 2010 FIFA World Cup tournament.
Eto'o scored the first goal after four minutes, and provided two clinical assists to Wesley Sneijder and to Goran Pandev for the winner.
Eto'o scored the opening goal in a 5–3 defeat at home to CSKA Moscow leaving his side four points above Krasnodar with only two games left for qualification to the Championship Group.
Eto'o scored the opening goal in the 2009 UEFA Champions League Final against Manchester United.
Eto'o set a bold target to win the CAN 2027, hosted by Tanzania, Kenya, and Uganda, declaring "we come to win it" and vowing revenge after missing the 2026 World Cup due to internal conflicts between Fécafoot and the sports ministry.
Eto'o was a fast, strong, and energetic forward, who was known for his stamina, work-rate, ability in the air, and his accurate finishing ability both with his head and feet.
Eto'o was a part of the squads that won the 2000 and 2002 Africa Cup of Nations, and was a gold medalist at the 2000 Summer Olympics.
Eto'o was appointed Ambassador of the 2022 FIFA World Cup in Qatar.
Eto'o was crowned paramount chief in Kaffu Bullom, a chiefdom in Sierra Leone in November 2015.
Eto'o was very gracious to teammates after the game, saying, "It has been a team effort although only one person gets the award.
Eto'o won his first silverware with the club on 5 May as Inter defeated Roma 1–0 at Stadio Olimpico to lift the Coppa Italia.
Eto'o's contract with Chelsea expired at the end of the 2013–14 season, and on 26 August 2014, he joined fellow English Premier League side Everton, signing a two-year contract.
European Journal of Sociology.
European goods became status symbols, and some rulers appointed Western traders and missionaries as advisors.
European traders arrived in the fifteenth century and Cameroon was the exonym given by the Portuguese to the Wouri River, which they called Rio dos Camarões—"river of shrimps" or "shrimp river", referring to the then-abundant Cameroon ghost shrimp.
Evangelical denominations dominate, particularly the Baptist church.
Even infrastructure projects relied on a regimen of forced labour.
Eventually Britain sold the majority of German plantations in British Cameroon back to their original German owners and opened up African maritime ports for German trade.
Eventually, separatists declared independence in October 2017 under the name Ambazonia.
Evidence from archaeological excavations at Shum Laka in the Northwest Region shows human occupation in Cameroon dating back 30,000 years.
Evidence from digs at Shum Laka in the Northwest Region shows human occupation dating back 30,000 years while in the dense forests of the south, the oldest evidence of occupation is around 7000 years old.
Evolution of population in Douala (in thousands) With 1.9 million inhabitants in 2005, Douala is the most populated city of Cameroon.
Ewale moved to the mouth of the Dibamba with his followers and then northwest to the east bank of Wouri River estuary.
Ewale's people became the Duala, and Dibongo's the Limba.
Example 1: In (Xi)Tsonga and (Chi)Shona, famba means "walk" while famba-famba means "walk around".
Example 2: in isiZulu and (si)Swati hamba means "go", hambahamba means "go a little bit, but not much".
Example 3: in both of the above languages shaya means "strike", shayashaya means "strike a few more times lightly, but not heavy strikes and not too many times".
Example 4: In Shona kwenya means "scratch", Kwenyakwenya means "scratch excessively or a lot".
Example 5: In Luhya cheenda means "walk", cheendacheenda means "take a walk but not far off", as in buying time before something is ready or a situation or time is right.
Example: in Swahili, piga means "strike", pigapiga means "strike repeatedly".
Examples of animal tricksters include Anansi, a spider in the folklore of the Ashanti people of Ghana; Ijàpá, a tortoise in Yoruba folklore of Nigeria; and Sungura, a hare found in central and East African folklore.
Examples of pre-colonial African literature are numerous.
Examples of pre-colonial African literature can be traced back to at least the fourth century AD.
Exceedingly hot and humid with a short dry season, this belt is densely forested and includes some of the wettest places on earth, part of the Cross-Sanaga-Bioko coastal forests.
Extensive walled settlements have recently been found in Northeast Nigeria, approximately 60 km (37 mi) southwest of Lake Chad dating to the first millennium BCE.
FAO Interdepartmental Working Group on Biological Diversity for Food and Agriculture.
FIFA then imposed fines on Cameroon and deducted six points from their qualifying campaign.
FIFA, however, did not allow Cameroon to use the same kits as at the 2002 World Cup, and black sleeves were added to the shirts.
Facing mounting international pressure for a global ceasefire, in July 2020, Cameroon began negotiating with these imprisoned leaders.
Factory-based industry accounted for an estimated 26.5% of GDP in 2017.
Falola, Toyin (24 April 2008).
Farmers have shifted from planting mainly dry crops, such as wheat, to rice with high water demand, resulting in more serious soil salinization and water eutrophication.
Farnborough: Gregg International.
Female genital mutilation (FGM), while not widespread, is practised among some populations; according to a 2013 UNICEF report, 1% of women in Cameroon have undergone FGM.
Female writers are today far better represented in published African literature than they were before independence (see Daughters of Africa, edited by Margaret Busby, 1992).
Fertility rate remains high in Cameroon with an average of 4.8 births per woman and an average mother's age of 19.7 years old at first birth.
Finally, the Wakomi, or slaves, made up the bottom rung.
Finds include bronze sculptures and terra cotta statues of human and animal figures, coins, funerary urns, household utensils, jewelry, highly decorated pottery, and spears.
First, dispossessed family members were not automatically entitled to live off the wealth of the heir.
Fisheries have traditionally been managed by a system where each village has recognized rights over a defined part of the river, wetland or lake, and fishers from elsewhere must seek permission and pay a fee to use this area.
Fishing employs 5,000 people and provides over 100,000 tons of seafood each year.
Fishing has traditionally been the most important economic activity for the people of the lake area, which almost ceased during drought periods and only resumed in the mid-1990s.
Fishing is the trade of choice.
Five fault structural zones parallel to the basin‐bounding faults have developed from west to east.
Five soldiers and one civilian were killed.
Flood recession agriculture is practiced around Lake Chad and in the riverine wetlands.
Following Dibango, a wave of musicians electrified makossa in an attempt at making it more accessible outside of Cameroon.
Following World War I and the Treaty of Versailles, Kamerun was divided between a French and a British League of Nations Mandate.
Following World War II, the League of Nations' successor, the United Nations, instituted a Trusteeship system, leaving France and Britain in control of their respective regions, French Cameroon and British Cameroon.
Following a French Cameroon unilateral referendum on 20 May 1972, a new constitution was adopted in Cameroon which replaced the federal state with a unitary state, and also gave more power to the president.
Following instances of popular uprisings against the separatists in Balikumbat and Babungo, the ADF ordered its fighters to take action against anyone caught terrorizing civilians.
Following is an incomplete list of the principal Bantu languages of each country.
Following the Bantu Migration from Western Africa, Bantu kingdoms and empires began to develop in southern Central Africa.
Following the Bantu Migration, Central Africa is primarily inhabited by Native African or Bantu peoples and Bantu languages predominate.
Following the creation of a unitary state in 1972, Biya was appointed prime minister by President Ahidjo on 30 June 1975.
Following the election, two people from Kumba were murdered for having voted.
Following the explosions, security forces started raiding houses in neighborhoods where displaced Anglophones were living.
Following the growing interest in Africa among European academic and business communities, the Lake Chad area was extensively described by Europeans in the 19th century.
Following the incident, soldiers went on a shooting spree while searching for the attackers.
Following the insistence of the Cameroonian President, Milla decided to make a comeback to international football by making an official announcement in May 1990.
Following the suppression of 2016–17 protests by Cameroonian authorities, separatists in the Anglophone regions (formerly collectively known as the Southern Cameroons) launched a guerrilla campaign and later proclaimed independence.
Foncha became the prime minister of West Cameroon and vice president of the Federal Republic of Cameroon.
Football at the Summer Olympics has been an under-23 tournament since 1992.
Football is the most popular sport in Cameroon.
For example, Akwa was historically divided between Bell and Deido into Bonadibong, Bonamilengue, Boneleke, Bonalembe, Bonejang, Bonamuti, Bonabekombo, Bonaboijan, and Bonakuamuang; the prefix "bona" means "descendant of".
For example, Duala belief holds that their ancestors live in the sea.
For example, many Duala supported the pro-independence Union des Populations du Cameroun party (UPC) when it first formed.
For instance, "Mwenda pole hajikwai," means "He who goes slowly doesn't trip," while, "Pole pole ndio mwendo," means "A slow but steady pace wins the race." The latter repeats "pole" to emphasize the consistency of slowness of the pace.
For many writers, this emphasis was not restricted to their publishing.
For most of the Quaternary, the basin had abundant water sources.
For the Bamileke, sculptors are intermediaries who are charged with realizing God's vision through the depiction of symbols and signs.
For the Bamileke, statues, reliefs and paintings represent life forces that safeguard intangible attributes of death that allow them to live eternally.
For the City Yet to Come: Changing African Life in Four Cities.
Four Cameroonian soldiers were killed and another six were wounded in a separatist IED ambush in Mamfe.
Four days later, Cameroonian soldiers killed four unarmed men in Buea.
Four people including two government forces and two civilians were killed in a separatist attack in Bambui.
Four years later, at the age of 42, Milla broke his own record as the oldest goalscorer in World Cup by scoring against Russia in the 1994 FIFA World Cup.
Fowler, Ian, and David Zeitlyn, eds.
France became the new steward of Duala territories.
France gained the larger geographical share, transferred Neukamerun back to neighboring French colonies, and ruled the rest from Yaoundé as Cameroun (French Cameroons).
France integrated the economy of Cameroon with that of France and improved the infrastructure with capital investments and skilled workers, modifying the colonial system of forced labour.
France is Cameroon's main trading partner and source of private investment and foreign aid.
France is also the leading foreign investor in Cameroon.
France outlawed the pro-independence political party, the Union of the Peoples of Cameroon (French: Union des Populations du Cameroun, UPC), on 13 July 1955.
France prevailed 1-0 following Thierry Henry's golden goal in the 7th minute of extra time, but abstained from traditional post-match celebrations.
France received a mandate to administer Douala.
Franck Biya is seen as a possible successor of his father in the context of presidential elections scheduled for 2025.
Freedom House ranks Cameroon as "not free" in terms of political rights and civil liberties.
French Cameroon achieved independence on January 1, 1960.
French Cameroon joined the Free France in August 1940.
French Cameroun became independent, as Cameroun or Cameroon, in January 1960, and Nigeria was scheduled for independence later that same year, which raised the question of what to do with the British territory.
French and English are official languages, a heritage of Cameroon's colonial past as a colony of both France and the United Kingdom from 1916 to 1961.
French and English are official languages, but Douala is primarily francophone.
French nationals control 55% of the modern sector of the Cameroonian economy and their control over the banking system is total.
Frenchman Paul Le Guen was appointed as the new coach after a draw against Morocco.
Frequent clouds and mists sustain profuse epiphytes, including mosses, ferns, and orchids.
From 1804 to 1808 the Fulani War saw the Bornu pushed north out of Cameroon and the Sokoto Caliphate took control of the region, as well as most of northern Nigeria and large swathes of Niger and Mali.
From 1884, Cameroon was a German colony, German Kamerun, with its borders drawn through negotiations between the Germans, British, and French.
From 1940 to 1946, it was the capital of Cameroon.
From 1995 to 1998, it fluctuated within the range of 1,200 to 4,500 km2 (460 to 1,740 sq mi).
From June 1966 to January 1973, the area of Lake Chad shrank from 22,772 to 15,400 km2 (8,792 to 5,946 sq mi), further shrunk to 4,398 km2 (1,698 sq mi) in 1975, and only 1,756 km2 (678 sq mi) in February 1994.
From Prehistoric Times to the Nineteenth Century.
From Timbuktu alone, there are an estimated 300,000 or more manuscripts tucked away in various libraries and private collections, mostly written in Arabic but some in the native languages (namely Fula and Songhai).
From around 2013, bilateral relations increasingly emphasised joint counterterrorism actions against Boko Haram and Islamic State – West Africa Province, alongside other regional security initiatives, especially in the Gulf of Guinea.
From being severely outgunned in the fall of 2018, by the summer of 2019 the separatists had become well-armed.
From the early 1960s to the mid-1980s, the lake water level decreased by 3 m (9.8 ft) compared to the average level from 1900 to 2010.
From there, Bantu migrations into eastern, southern and central Africa are believed to have occurred about 2,000 years ago.
Frost-tolerant tussock grasses, dwarf trees and shrubs, and crustose, foliose, and fruticose lichens predominate.
Fru Ndi had travelled to Kumbo to attend the funeral of Joseph Banadzem, the Parliamentary group leader of the SDF.
Fulani soldiers founded the Adamawa Emirate in the north in the 19th century, and various ethnic groups of the west and northwest established powerful chiefdoms and fondoms.
Fulfulde serves the same function in the north, and Ewondo in much of the Center, South, and East provinces.
Further innovations followed, as Messi replaced the handclaps and sanza with a synthesizer and the foot-stamping 6/8 rhythm to drums.
Further south, there is little archaeological evidence of large empires or kingdoms and no historical record due to the lack of writing in the region.
GDP has grown by about 5% a year beginning in 1995.
Gabon was also defeated by Togo 1–0 in Lomé.
Generally, breakfast is made from wheat flour in different foods such as puff-puff (doughnuts), accra banana made from bananas and flour, bean cakes, and many more.
Geochemical analyses show early fractionation of olivine and diopside followed by Fe–Ti oxides and plagioclase, making the 1959 lavas the most fractionated of all 20th‑century Mount Cameroon lavas.
George Grenfell and the Congo : a history and description of the Congo Independent State and adjoining districts of Congoland, together with some account of the native peoples and their languages, the fauna and flora, and similar notes on the Cameroons and the Island of Fernando Pô.
Georgette is the mother of Siena and Lynn, who both live with her in Paris.
German Chancellor Otto von Bismarck defined the order of priorities as follows: "first the merchant, then the soldier".
German Colonization, Past and Future: The Truth about the German Colonies.
German companies built warehouses in Douala but were not allowed to purchase land.
German pretended that Ibrahim Njoya of the Bamum tipped the Germans off, and Bell and his collaborators were executed in 1914 for high treason.
German, the country's official language during the German colonial period until World War I, has nowadays almost entirely yielded to its two successors.
German, the language of the original colonisers, has long since been displaced by French and English.
Germany began to establish roots in Cameroon in 1868 when the Woermann Company of Hamburg built a warehouse.
Germany established an administration for the colony with a capital first at Buea and later at Yaoundé and continued to explore the interior and co-opt or subjugate local rulers.
Germany had some trouble establishing control over the hinterlands of Victoria, and fought the Bafut Wars against local fondoms until 1907.
Germany stopped the conflict when one of its nationals was killed.
Germany was particularly interested in Cameroon's agricultural potential and entrusted large firms with the task of exploiting and exporting it.
Germany's Colonial Demands, Oxford University Press.
Getting a government position can happen several different ways: Regional background, ethical background, party loyalty, and who you know.
Gikandi, Simon (ed.), Encyclopedia of African Literature, London: Routledge, 2003.
Girls attend school less regularly than boys do because of cultural attitudes, domestic duties, early marriage, pregnancy, and sexual harassment.
Given the RDPC's control of the National Assembly, the change was overwhelmingly approved, with 157 votes in favor and five opposed; the 15 deputies of the SDF chose to boycott the vote in protest.
Glottolog (2021) does not consider the older geographic classification by Guthrie relevant for its ongoing classification based on more recent linguistic studies, and divides Bantu into four main branches: Bantu A-B10-B20-B30, Central-Western Bantu, East Bantu and Mbam-Bube-Jarawan.
Glottolog has incorporated many of these into their classification.
Good morning good afternoon good evening good night.
Gordon, Understanding Contemporary Africa, London: Lynne Rienner, 1996, ch.
Gourd is widely planted for making utensils.
Governors have broad powers: they may order propaganda in their area and call in the army, gendarmes, and police.
Gravity and wavelet-analysis studies reveal dense mantle intrusions rising into the crust and suggest that the Tiko and Ekona faults focus magma ascent to depths of at least 25 km.
Guitarist Zanzibar added foam rubber to the bridge of his guitar, which made the instrument sound more like a balafon than before, and was more aggressive and innovative than previous musicians.
Gunmen also attacked the Government Bilingual High School in Bamenda; one student was injured in the attack.
Guthrie 1948 in detail, with subsequent corrections and corresponding ISO codes.
Guthrie reconstructed both the phonemic inventory and the vocabulary of Proto-Bantu.
Gynocentric Contours of the Male Imagination: A Study of the Novels of Chinua Achebe and Ngugi wa Thiong'o.
Göttingen: Vandenhoek und Ruprecht.
Halfway through the first millennium BCE, the Bantu had also settled as far south as what is now Angola.
Having trained at the Kadji Sports Academy in Cameroon, Eto'o joined Real Madrid's youth academy in 1997, but he could only train with Real Madrid B, as he was still a minor.
He achieved international stardom at 38 years old, an age at which most forwards have retired, by scoring four goals at the 1990 FIFA World Cup, becoming the oldest goalscorer in World Cup history at the time.
He agreed, and went to Italy with the Indomitable Lions for the 1990 World Cup, where he would cause a sensation.
He along with other children had to play in dusty courts since Cameroon had not yet established children soccer academies at that time and Cameroon did not have the luxury of well maintained fields nor did they afford to have licensed coaches.
He also condemned anyone engaged in kidnappings of civilians, and promised to fight back against anyone involved in such practices.
He also had the habit of kicking lemons and rags tied together into balls.
He also opened two companies for recycling plastic into paving slabs.
He also scored a tally of 89 goals in 116 appearances for Léopard Douala during a tenure of four years.
He also scored against Villarreal in the game that put Barcelona one point away from lifting the 2008–09 La Liga trophy.
He also went onto serve as the manager of the Tonnerre for a tenure of four years between 2007 and 2011.
He also won the Africa Cup of Nations in 2000 and 2002.
He also works as a volunteer for various groups including the World Wide Fund for Nature.
He became the talk of the town and tournament sensation during the 1990 FIFA World Cup mainly for his skill sets on the field, dance celebrations and for his technique.
He closed out his playing days with two clubs in Indonesia after the 1994 World Cup, retiring from the sport at the end of the 1996 season.
He coached Montpellier from 2001 to 2007.
He continued in this capacity until José Morais was hired as Şimşek's permanent replacement on 6 January 2016.
He describes Cameroon's electoral process in these terms: "Every few years, Biya stages an election to justify his continuing reign, but these elections have no credibility.
He didn't follow the anti-western policies pursued by many of these leaders, which helped Cameroon achieve a degree of comparative political stability, retain Western investment, and see fairly steady economic growth.
He endured mixed emotions at 1982 FIFA World Cup having a goal disallowed against Peru in their first match.
He even has considerable authority over the judiciary; the courts can only review a law's constitutionality at his request.
He expressed regret and asked for forgiveness from Real Madrid, his first professional team.
He finished as the top scorer for the second consecutive tournament, matching his 2006 total of five goals.
He finished with a total of 16 league goals in 18 appearances for the season.
He followed it up with another goal in the home fixture.
He gained the rank of minister in August 1968 and the rank of minister of state in June 1970, while remaining secretary-general of the presidency.
He had endured multiple injury concerns during his short stay and his team management decided to release him at the end of the season.
He has been consistently re-elected as the National President of the RDPC; he was re-elected at the party's second extraordinary congress on 7 July 2001 and its third extraordinary congress on 21 July 2006.
He has three brothers with different surnames such as Joseph Debouba, Jacques Edjanque and Alexandre Diboussi.
He has two brothers who are also footballers: David and Étienne.
He helped Cameroon become the first African team to reach the World Cup quarter-finals.
He is also a supporter of French club Paris Saint-Germain.
He is now an itinerant ambassador for African causes.
He is often ranked among the three greatest African strikers, alongside George Weah and Didier Drogba.
He is often regarded as one of the greatest strikers of all time and one of the greatest African players of all time.
He is one of several high-profile contemporary players to have reacted to the abuse by threatening to leave the pitch and being outspoken in criticism of their experiences.
He is the all-time leading scorer in the history of the Africa Cup of Nations, with 18 goals, and is Cameroon's all-time leading scorer and third most capped player, with 56 goals in 118 caps.
He is the fourth player in Champions League history, after Marcel Desailly, Paulo Sousa, and Gerard Piqué, to have won the trophy two years in a row with different teams.
He is the second player in history to score in two UEFA Champions League finals.
He later convinced his parents following his impressive performances in age group category matches.
He later shifted to Rosicrucianism, and was likely part of the Rosicrucian organization CIRCES, led by the French esotericist Raymond Bernard.
He learnt the art of playing football by playing barefoot with fellow kids on dirt streets and roads and in most of the occasions he played with an orange or a tin can as an alternative option for a ball.
He led the scoring chart with eight qualification goals.
He made his World Cup debut in also what is considered to be the maiden World Cup appearance for Cameroon when they qualified for the 1982 FIFA World Cup after winning both their final round matches against Morocco at the 1982 FIFA World Cup qualification for the African Zone.
He made his debut for Eclair de Douala's senior team in the second division of the Cameroonian championship at the age of 15.
He made his debut four days later, scoring one goal with a header in a 3–6 home defeat to Chelsea.
He made his debut on 15 August 2015 in a league match against İstanbul Başakşehir, scoring two goals and helping Antalyaspor win 3–2.
He married his longtime sweetheart Georgette on 6 July 2007.
He missed a team practice before the quarter-finals to attend the CAF African Footballer of the Year award ceremonies in Togo.
He moved to France at the age of 25 in 1977 where he spent 12 years of his career playing for various clubs.
He nearly quit the sport after his mother's untimely death at home during the time when he played soccer in a distant arena and also due to his wife had become pregnant as the couple were awaiting for their second child.
He nevertheless leads an authoritarian regime in Cameroon.
He next moved to Saint-Etienne in 1984 and became a crucial member of the club, which was recovering from the aftermath of a massive bribery scandal in 1982 and the subsequent relegation to Division 2, having had to sell out most of its first-choice players.
He noticed the term to represent the word for "people" in loosely reconstructed Proto-Bantu, from the plural noun class prefix *ba- categorizing "people", and the root *ntʊ̀- "some (entity), any" (e.g.
He once again played a vital role in Cameroon's trumph at the 1988 African Cup of Nations and for his noteworthy performances throughout the tournament, he was adjudged as the player of the tournament and was also included in the 1988 African Cup of Nations team of the tournament.
He overall played 69 matches for the club scoring 36 goals and played a part in helping the club to re-enter the first division.
He played for Eclair de Douala's junior team at the age of 13 and engaged exclusively in school tournaments.
He played in three World Cups for the Cameroon national team.
He scored 30 goals in the season, finishing second in the Pichichi Trophy goalscorers list behind Atlético de Madrid's Diego Forlán.
He scored four goals in Italy, celebrating each one with a dance around the corner flag that has become a popular goal celebration ever since.
He scored his first goal for Chelsea on 19 October 2013 against Cardiff City, in which he gave Chelsea the lead.
He scored his first goal in Coppa Italia on 13 April against Fiorentina in the second of semi-finals to help Inter win 1–0 at Stadio Artemio Franchi and progress in the final 2–0 on aggregate.
He signed for Qatar SC in August 2018.
He signed up for the top division club Léopard Douala in 1970 at the age of 18 and eventually went onto win three Cameroonian championship titles with the club.
He signed with Inter Milan for the 2009–10 season, where he became the first player to win two European continental trebles following his back-to-back achievements with Barcelona and Inter.
He started in the second half in four out of five World Cup matches and appeared in the first half once.
He stated that he wanted to win the UEFA Europa League with Everton, a tournament which he had never won before.
He stated, "It is something that has affected me personally.
He studied at the Lycée General Leclerc, Yaoundé, and in France at the Lycée Louis-le-Grand, Paris, going on to the Institut des hautes études d'Outre-Mer, where he graduated in 1961 with a higher education diploma in public law.
He subsequently moved to Tonnerre Yaoundé in 1974 four years after the successful stint with Léopard Douala.
He succeeded Ahidjo as president upon the latter's surprise resignation in 1982 and consolidated power after an attempted coup in 1984, eliminating his major rivals.
He then starred for Montpellier from 1986 to 1989, where Milla later went on to become a member of the club's coaching staff after retiring from French football.
He thus has great respect from the population.
He was a key member of the Cameroonian side which emerged as runners-up to Egypt in the final of the 1986 African Cup of Nations and he received the best player award in the tournament for being the top goal scorer with 4.
He was also named in 1986 African Cup of Nations team of the tournament.
He was also re-elected as President of Cameroon on 24 April 1988.
He was also the joint top goalscorer in the 1988 African Cup of Nations with 2 goals alongside Algeria's Lakhdar Belloumi, Abdoulaye Traoré of Ivory Coast and Gamal Abdelhamid of Egypt.
He was appointed as honorary president of the Cameroonian Football Federation in March 2008.
He was cleared to play again on 4 December, and returned to the side a week later in Barcelona's 2–1 league win over Deportivo de La Coruña.
He was freed on 2 May 2011 when the London chapter of International PEN agreed to pay his fine in order that he might seek treatment for his worsening health condition.
He was later dubbed as "King of the Corner Flag".
He was often referred to as Miller whenever he featured in high-profile international matches with World Cup statistical sheets referring to him as Miller speaks volume of how far his name had been mispronounced and wrongly heard in international community.
He was one of the first African players to be a major star on the international stage.
He was previously the fifth prime minister under President Ahmadou Ahidjo from 1975 to 1982.
He was raised up in the streets of Yaoundé and he hailed from a typical middle-class family so that his parents were able to provide him a satisfactory education.
He was released after eight days.
He was rescued four hours later by the Cameroonian military.
He was subsequently given a two-year prison term on charges of "insult to character" and organizing an "illegal demonstration" for attempting to hold a public reading.
He was the oldest outfield player to feature in the 1990 FIFA World Cup and was the second oldest player during the tournament after England's Peter Shilton.
He was the sole candidate in this election and won 99.98% of the vote.
He was the youngest player of the tournament alongside Michael Owen of England.
He was then sent back to Kondengui Central Prison, despite the fact that he was immunocompromised and the risk of getting COVID-19 in a crowded prison.
He was visiting Sierra Leone as part of the FIFA "11 for Health and 11 against Ebola" programme in the country.
He went on to score an 82nd minute winning goal in the same match, sending Cameroon to the top of their qualifying group.
He went on to tour Europe and North America.
He won the African Cup Winners' Cup with Tonnerre Yaoundé and for Tonnerre Yaoundé club he scored 69 goals in 87 games.
He won the African Player of the Year a record four times, winning in 2003, 2004, 2005, and 2010.
He won the contentious 1992 presidential election with 40% of the plurality, single-ballot vote and was re-elected by large margins in 1997, 2004, 2011, 2018, and 2025.
He wrote in Ethnic groups in conflict: "Primogeniture among the Bamileke and matrilineal inheritance among the Minangkabau of Indonesia have contributed powerfully to the propensity of males from both groups to migrate out of their home region in search of opportunity".
Heads of rival sub-lineages soon rivalled him, including the self-styled King Akwa (Ngando Mpondo) in 1814, King Deido (Jim Ekwalla) of the Deido (an Akwa splinter group), and Prince Lock Priso (Kum'a Mbape) of the Bonaberi.
Heavy fighting took place in July.
Heavy fighting took place in June, with the separatists suffering dozens of casualties.
Hello how are you today I am doing well thank you very much.
Herbert Isaac Ernest Dhlomo of South Africa published the first English-language African play, The Girl Who Killed to Save: Nongqawuse the Liberator in 1935.
Here, the brothers parted ways after a row.
His 12 Serie A goals helped Inter claim another championship, the fifth consecutive, after defeating Siena in the final matchday.
His birth certificate as well as his passport implies his name as Roger Miller due to a clerical error and misunderstanding.
His celebrations were deemed as instant hit and triggered positive energy to the viewers during the World Cup.
His family moved to Douala when he was 11.
His father worked on the railroads and Milla had the fortune of travelling all over the nation on many occasions in his childhood.
His final international appearance came in a friendly against South Africa in December 1994.
His first hat trick for Inter occurred in the UEFA Champions League against Werder Bremen on 29 September 2010.
His impressive form saw him join Barcelona in 2004 where he scored 130 goals in five seasons and also became the record holder for the most appearances by an African player in La Liga.
His parents wanted to give him the surname of his uncle 'Milla' by the time he was born.
His second goal celebration against Colombia became iconic across the world, and was used by Coca-Cola as seen in ads like the 2010 World Cup Coca-Cola advertisement.
His son Naweej expanded the empire further and is known as the first Lunda emperor, with the title Mwata Yamvo (mwaant yaav, mwant yav), the "Lord of Vipers".
His sons, Ewale and Dibombo, migrated north and reached a place called Pitti on the Dibamba River.
His teammates intervened and convinced him to continue playing.
His treatment was condemned by his lawyers and by Human Rights Watch.
His two crucial goals came in the second half of the match against Romania within just two minutes in extra time where he once again appeared as a substitute and following his heroics, he was hailed as a hero in Cameroon.
His wily celebration in a kind of Makossa dance at corner flag area during the 1990 FIFA World Cup changed the perceptions of how people started to see African football in a positive manner.
Historical Dictionary of the Republic of Cameroon (3 ed.).
Historical Dictionary of the Republic of Cameroon.
Historical dictionary of the Republic of Cameroon (Rowman & Littlefield, 2019).
Historical records document major eruptions in 1909, 1922, 1925, 1954, 1959, 1982, 1999, 2000 and 2012.
Historically a residential neighbourhood, it has become a mixed area including commercial galleries, restaurants and shops.
Historically the warm, wet climate in many parts of the country was thought of as inhospitable to the preservation of remains, but recent finds and the introduction of new techniques have challenged that assumption.
History of Africa (Revised 2nd ed.).
History of Cameroon Since 1800.
History of Cameroon Western Togoland Rebellion – A separatist revolt in former British Togoland, which was dissolved in a manner which was similar to the manner in which British Southern Cameroons dissolved.
Hong Kong: Macmillan Education Ltd, 1989.
Hong Kong: Macmillan Education Ltd.
Horowitz also attributes the economic success of the Bamileke to their inheritance customs, arguing that it encouraged younger sons to seek their own living abroad.
Hot Heads expanded the lyrical format of the genre to include socio-political issues.
Houses of family members are often grouped together and surrounded by small fields.
However many of the city's roads have decayed due to years of neglect and corruption.
However, Ahidjo did not resign his role as leader of the governing party, and many speculated that he hoped Biya would be a figurehead, or perhaps even a temporary caretaker, as Ahidjo was rumored to be ill and receiving medical care in France.
However, Ahidjo remained in control of the CNU and tried to run the country from behind the scenes until Biya and his allies pressured him into resigning.
However, Biya was able to hole up in the presidential palace with his bodyguard until troops from outside the capital were able to retake control within two days.
However, Eto'o left halfway through his first season at Everton, having scored four goals in 20 games across all competitions for them.
However, Eto'o's return was not enough for Cameroon to overturn a 0–2 first leg deficit, and the Indomitable Lions failed to qualify for the Cup of Nations.
However, a clustering of sounds at the beginning of a syllable can be readily observed in such languages as Shona, and the Makua languages.
However, after independence, efforts to demarcate the border revealed that a 1913 agreement between Britain and Germany, placed Bakassi in German Cameroon and accordingly should belong to Cameroon.
However, as a foreign language subject German still enjoys huge popularity among pupils and students, with 300,000 people learning or speaking German in Cameroon in 2010.
However, at the party conference in September, Biya was elected to lead the party and Ahidjo resigned.
However, by 1990, pressure from Western governments was mounting as the end of the Cold War made them less tolerant of authoritarian allies.
However, cell phone networks and Internet providers have increased dramatically since the first decade of the 21st century and are largely unregulated.
However, due to climate change and human water diversion, it has shrunk significantly since the mid-1970s, and its area has fluctuated between 2,000 and 5,000 km2 (770 and 1,930 sq mi).
However, he was removed from the position as honorary president in May 2012 after criticising the top officials of the Cameroon Football Federation with regards to the lengthy ban imposed on Samuel Eto'o.
However, he was then substituted after ten minutes for Fernando Torres after picking up a slight injury; Chelsea went on to win the match 6–0.
However, his parents were unhappy when they noticed that Milla was going after football and they were initially reluctant to accept their son playing the sport of football.
However, if it is true that I am a problem for my team then I will go.
However, in 1990, he received a phone call from the President of Cameroon Paul Biya, who pleaded with him to come out of international retirement and rejoin the national team.
However, it relies on lexicostatistics, which, because of its reliance on overall similarity rather than shared innovations, may predict spurious groups of conservative languages that are not closely related.
However, large areas of the forest are difficult to reach.
However, like other underdeveloped countries, Douala also faces some problems such as heavy civil service and bad climate (specifically a high incidence of extreme weather events including floods, tornadoes, and storms) to business.
However, she deleted the post and broke up with Valença after explicit photographs of them were released without her consent on the Internet.
However, since the first decade of the 21st century, an increasing number of police and gendarmes have been prosecuted for improper conduct.
However, the Ambazonia Self-Defence Council (ASC), the armed wing of the IG, declared that the SCLC had no authority to call off the lockdown without consulting it first.
However, the English-speaking peoples of the Southern Cameroons did not believe that they were fairly treated by the 80% majority French-speaking government of the country.
However, the arrival of British and German colonizers cut short its growth and influence.
However, the corruption has gotten worse, regardless of the existing anti-corruption bureaus, as Transparency International ranked Cameroon 152 on a list of 180 countries in 2018.
However, the danger posed by COVID-19 did not bring about an immediate end of hostilities on the ground; just the day before Sako's declaration, separatists attacked an armored car, killing a soldier and 11 officials, including two deputy mayors.
However, the dialogue was unsuccessful for different reasons.
However, the indigenous peoples proved reluctant to work on these projects, so the Germans instigated a harsh and unpopular system of forced labour.
However, the latter was overshadowed by the sudden on-field collapse of Cameroon midfielder Marc-Vivien Foé in the 71st minute.
However, the other sites were not as deadly, although working conditions were generally very harsh.
However, the reduction in forest area has had a negative impact on the production of these products, and the explosive growth of cattle herds has exacerbated this impact.
However, the ruling was resisted by Nigeria.
However, the talks ultimately failed.
However, the team has only made it out of the group stage once, in 1990, when they became the first African team to reach the quarter-final of the World Cup.
However, the team has only made it out of the group stage once.
However, they had to wait for 30 years to receive the gift despite early promise by President Paul Biya in 1990.
However, this was rejected by Julius Ayuk Tabe, Samuel Ikome Sako and Ayaba Cho Lucas, all of whom insisted that a ceasefire had to precede school resumption.
Hudgens, Jim; Trillo, Richard (1999).
Human rights organisations accuse police and military forces of mistreating and even torturing criminal suspects, ethnic minorities, homosexuals, and political activists.
Human rights organisations allege that the government suppresses the freedoms of opposition groups by preventing demonstrations, disrupting meetings, and arresting opposition leaders and journalists.
Hundreds of additional troops were deployed to combat separatist attempts to sabotage the election, while the separatists abducted 120 politicians within the two weeks preceding the election.
Hundreds of people fled Ewai during the raid.
I believe the victories I have earned up to now can contribute to giving the right value to my name." On 8 August, Eto'o scored on his competitive debut in the 2009 Supercoppa Italiana as Inter lost 1–2 to Lazio.
I do not want to take anything away from Ibrahimović, but for everyone it was really a great deal to get Eto'o.
I think players, leaders, and the media have to join forces so that no one feels looked down upon because of the colour of their skin.
I want to learn the Cameroon languages and culture.
IEDs in particular proved effective for the separatists, and their frequent use, either alone or as part of ambushes, started to cause heavy Cameroonian casualties from the beginning of 2021.
ISBN 978-1-897999-30-1.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link) Finck, Franz Nikolaus (1908).
ISBN 9788193326978 Things We Inherited: Voices from Africa Cordite Poetry Review New African Literature resource The Africa_(Bookshelf) at Project Gutenberg African Literature Association African Literature Reviews Archived 23 May 2021 at the Wayback Machine "(Literature)".
If the parties failed to reach a solution, the matter could go to court.
Imane Ayissi is one of Cameroon's most prominent fashion designers and has received international recognition.
Imane Ayissi is one of Cameroon's top fashion designers and has received international recognition.
Important protected areas for these species are the Mbam Djerem National Park, Benoue National Park, Korup National Park, Takamanda National Park, and the Kagwene Gorilla Sanctuary.
In 1506, Afonso I (1506–1542), a Christian, took over the throne.
In 1574 the Ottoman Empire had invaded Fezzan and the Oasis, and even reached into Lake Chad.
In 1574, Manikongo Álvaro I was reinstated with the help of Portuguese mercenaries.
In 1807, the British abolished slavery in the Empire and began military efforts to suppress the slave trade, particularly in West Africa.
In 1826 Douala appeared to be made of four different villages located in four specific locations: the village of Deido (Dido), of Akwa, of Njo and Hickory-town (today Bonaberi, located on the other side of Wouri River).
In 1870, the area of Lake Chad was about 28,000 km2 (11,000 sq mi).
In 1879, King Akwa sent such a request; Bell followed suit in 1881 (some historians believe that these documents were faked, however).
In 1884, the area became the British Ambas Bay Protectorate, with Victoria as its capital.
In 1885, Alfred Saker organized the first mission of the British Baptist Church.
In 1896 a first urban plan of the city was developed during the German colonial period.
In 1896, Sultan Ibrahim Njoya created the Bamum script, or Shu Mom, for the Bamum language.
In 1904 construction of the Villa Mandessi Bell was begun.
In 1905 the palace of the King Manga Ndumbe Bell (also called la Pagode) was built, and in 1906 the general plan of Gross Douala was established.
In 1907 the Ministry of Colonies was established and Douala had 23,000 citizens.
In 1911 at the Treaty of Fez after the Agadir Crisis, France ceded a nearly 300,000 km2 portion of the territory of French Equatorial Africa to Kamerun which became Neukamerun (New Cameroon), while Germany ceded a smaller area in the north in present-day Chad to France.
In 1911, Joseph Ephraim Casely Hayford (also known as Ekra-Agiman) of the Gold Coast (now Ghana) published what is probably the first African novel written in English, Ethiopia Unbound: Studies in Race Emancipation.
In 1914 the large population living in Bonanjo was moved to the new estate of Neue Bell (New Bell).
In 1918, Germany lost World War I, and her colonies became mandates of the League of Nations.
In 1925, the mortality rate on the site was 61.7%.
In 1935 the Mausoleum of the Kings Akwa was constructed.
In 1937, the French expelled the Duala from Akwa town (an area of Douala), although they allowed them to maintain ownership of the land.
In 1945, the country was placed under the supervision of the United Nations, as successor to the League of Nations, which left Cameroon under French control as a UN Trust Territory.
In 1947 the Temple of the Centenary was built.
In 1948, the Union des populations du Cameroun (UPC), a nationalist movement, was founded and Ruben Um Nyobe took over as its leader.
In 1953, the Southern Cameroons delegation at a conference in London asked for a separate region.
In 1955 the city had over 100,000 inhabitants.
In 1959 a new city plan was designed (Plan Dorian); according to Danièle Diwouta-Kotto, this plan is still influencing Douala's urban development.
In 1960, Cameroon became independent with part of British Cameroons voting to join former French Cameroon.
In 1960, Cameroon gained independence as a federal republic, with its capital in Yaoundé.
In 1960, the French-administered part of Cameroon became independent, as the Republic of Cameroun, under President Ahmadou Ahidjo.
In 1961, Angola became involved in the Portuguese Colonial War, a 13-year-long struggle for independence in Lusophone Africa.
In 1961, he married Jeanne-Irène Biya, who did not have any children, though she adopted Franck Biya, who had been born in 1971 from a relationship between Biya and Jeanne-Irène's sister or niece.
In 1962, Ngũgĩ wa Thiong'o of Kenya wrote the first East African drama, The Black Hermit, a cautionary tale about "tribalism" (discrimination between African tribes).
In 1966, opposition parties were banned and Cameroon became a one-party state.
In 1972, a referendum was held on a new constitution, which replaced the federation between East and West with a unitary state called the United Republic of Cameroon and further expanded the power of the president.
In 1972, the federal republic became a unitary state.
In 1977, he was lured to Europe by the French club Valenciennes.
In 1979, he joined AS Monaco, where he won the 1980 French Cup and scored 5 goals in 25 league and cup games.
In 1980, L'Equipe Nationale de Makossa was formed, joining the biggest makossa stars of the period together, including, Grace Decca, Ndedi Eyango, Ben Decca, Guy Lobe, and Dina Bell.
In 1981, clashes between Nigerian and Cameroonian forces resulted in several deaths and nearly led to war between the two nations.
In 1984, a new wave of bikutsi artists emerged, including Sala Bekono formerly of Los Camaroes, Atebass, a bassist, and Zanzibar, a guitarist who would eventually help form Les Têtes Brulées with Jean-Marie Ahanda.
In 1985, the CNU was transformed into the Cameroon People's Democratic Movement, in Bamenda and Biya was unlawfully elected as its president.
In 1986, Nigeria's Wole Soyinka became the first post-independence African writer to win the Nobel Prize in literature.
In 1987, Dja Faunal Reserve, Cameroon's first World Heritage Site, was inscribed on the list by UNESCO.
In 1988, at the age of 36, Milla celebrated his early retirement from international football with a jubilee in Cameroon.
In 1991, Ben Okri's novel The Famished Road won the Booker Prize.
In 1993, representatives of Anglophone groups convened the first All Anglophone Conference (AAC1) in Buea.
In 1993, the Pedalé movement was born as a reaction to the Cameroonian economic slump.
In 1993, the situation worsened with both countries sending large military contingents to the region and numerous reports of skirmishes and attacks against civilians.
In 1994 Cameroon petitioned the International Court of Justice to resolve the dispute.
In 1997, Cameroon established anti-corruption bureaus in 29 ministries, but only 25% became operational, and in 2012, Transparency International placed Cameroon at number 144 on a list of 176 countries ranked from least to most corrupt.
In 1998 a research prepared the diagnostic for the 2015 horizon.
In 1998, he was the youngest participant in the 1998 FIFA World Cup when he appeared in a 3–0 group stage loss to Italy on 17 June 1998, at the age of 17 years and three months.
In 2002, the ICJ ruled that the Anglo-German Agreement of 1913 gave sovereignty to Cameroon.
In 2004 he was named by Pelé in the FIFA 100 list of the world's greatest living players.
In 2004, annoyed by the criticisms of international vote-monitoring groups, he paid for his own set of international observers, six ex-U.S.
In 2004, he was named to the FIFA 100, a list of the 125 greatest living footballers selected by Pelé in conjunction with FIFA's centenary celebrations.
In 2005 a new development and urban plan was designed and routes and public canalizations were reestablished and created.
In 2005, the probability to be literate in French while being anglophone was 0.46 while that of being literate in English while being francophone was 0.20, resulting from the predominant status of the French language in Cameroon as a whole.
In 2006, a faction of SCNC once again declared the independence of Ambazonia.
In 2007, Cameroon hosted approximately 97,400 refugees and asylum seekers.
In 2007, the Confederation of African Football named Milla the best African player of the previous 50 years.
In 2009, his holiday in France allegedly cost $40,000 a day spent on 43 hotel rooms.In 2009, Biya was ranked 19th in Parade Magazine's Top 20 list of "The World's Worst Dictators".
In 2011, South Sudan gained its independence from the Republic of Sudan after over 50 years of war.
In 2012, the top three deadly diseases were HIV/AIDS, lower respiratory tract infection, and diarrheal diseases.
In 2013, the primary school enrollment rate was 93.5%.
In 2013, the total adult literacy rate in Cameroon was estimated to be 71.3%.
In 2014, 63.7% of Douala inhabitants of over 15 years knew how to read and write French, while 76.4% knew how to speak and understand it.
In 2014, just 4.1% of total GDP expenditure was allocated to healthcare.
In 2014, the Boko Haram insurgency spread into Cameroon from Nigeria.
In 2015, he received the Golden Foot Award.
In 2016, 29,000 deaths due to AIDS occurred in both adults and children.
In 2016, Cameroonians in the nation's capital city of Yaoundé criticized Biya's reaction to the country's worst train crash in which 79 people died.
In 2017, Biya's government blocked the regions' access to the Internet for three months.
In 2017, President Biya shut down the Internet in the English-speaking region for 94 days, at the cost of hampering five million people, including Silicon Mountain startups.
In 2017, tensions over the creation of an Ambazonian state in the English-speaking territories escalated into open warfare.
In 2017, the National Commission for Human Rights and Freedoms embarked on a fact-finding mission in Buea to investigate allegations of human rights abuses in the region.
In 2017, there were language protests by the Anglophone population against perceived oppression by francophone speakers.
In 2019, the President of Cameroon initiated a 5-day dialogue between both parties.
In 2020, he along with the Cameroonian teammates received three bedroom bungalows as gifts in recognition of their stellar run during the 1990 FIFA World Cup.
In 2020, naturally regenerating forests covered 20,279,380 hectares (ha), and planted forests covered 61,100 hectares (ha).
In 2021, some separatist fighters began dressing up in captured Cameroonian military uniforms as a ruse of war, violating the Hague Convention of 1907 IV, Article 23.
In Algeria, oral poetry was an important part of Berber traditions when the majority of the population was illiterate.
In April 2017, a Cameroonian journalist working for Radio France Internationale, Ahmed Abba, was sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment by a military tribunal for failing to report acts of terrorism.
In August 2018, Minister of Territorial Administration Atanga Nji offered amnesty to separatists who surrender their weapons, saying they would "be received as prodigal sons".
In August 2018, the Centre for Human Rights and Democracy in Africa published a list of 105 villages that had been raided by government forces since October 2017.
In August 2018, the Defence Minister of Cameroon announced that the army would be expanded with 2,600 new recruits, 2,000 of whom would go to the BIR.
In August 2020, MRC leader Maurice Kamto threatened to start a "gigantic national campaign" to overthrow President Biya if the latter convened the electorate without first solving the Anglophone Crisis.
In Babessi, a separatist fighter was ambushed and killed in his home by soldiers.
In Bamenda, at least 20 separatist fighters moved around openly to prevent people from voting.
In Bamenda, the Cameroonian Army claimed to have discovered and disarmed several improvised explosive devices.
In Bamenda, the Governor of Northwest Region, Adolph Lele l'Afrique, was escorted by soldiers to attend a small celebration.
In Batibo, Cameroonian Army freed several hostages held by the ADF, including Senator Regina Mundi who had been held since 30 April.
In British Cameroons, many German administrators were allowed to run the plantations of the southern coastal area after World War I.
In Bui, Cameroon launched "Operation Bui 1", which resulted in the deaths of 12 separatists and two Cameroonian soldiers; days later, a separatist militia known as the Bui Warriors launched a series of IED attacks against Cameroonian soldiers in Bui, followed by an attack on a prison.
In Bui, a police inspector was killed in a separatist ambush.
In Bwabwa, six civilians were abducted by separatists.
In Cameroon's 2010 World Cup qualifying campaign, the team was grouped with Gabon, Togo and Morocco.
In Cameroon, 58% of those living with HIV know their status, and just 37% receive ARV treatment.
In Cameroon, Bantu people largely displaced Central African Pygmies such as the Baka, who were hunter-gatherers and who now survive in much smaller numbers in the heavily forested southeast.
In Cameroon, forest cover is around 43% of the total land area, equivalent to 20,340,480 hectares (ha) of forest in 2020, down from 22,500,000 hectares (ha) in 1990.
In Cameroon, there is only one doctor for every 5,000 people, according to the WHO.
In Chelsea's home Champions League match against Schalke 04 on 6 November, Eto'o scored twice in a 3–0 victory.
In December 1990, opposition parties were legalized for the first time since 1966.
In December 2010, Eto'o became the first man to be named African Player of the Year for a fourth time.
In December 2014, a List of Goods Produced by Child Labor or Forced Labor issued by the Bureau of International Labor Affairs mentioned Cameroon among the countries that resorted to child labor in the production of cocoa.
In Douala, the most developed city in Cameroon, accordions and ambasse bey music were common, with performers like Lobe Lobe, Ebanda Manfred, and Nelle Eyoum finding a local audience.
In Ekona, at least six people were killed in a government offensive.
In Ekona, the Fako Mountain Lions carried out three IED attacks against the Cameroonian army, and three civilians were killed in the subsequent gunfights.
In Eto'o's first league start of 2014, on 19 January, he scored his first Premier League hat-trick for Chelsea, earning the Blues a 3–1 victory over Manchester United at Stamford Bridge.
In Eyumodjock, a gendarmerie brigade was attacked by separatists; the gendarmes escaped before the attack occurred.
In February 1984, Ahidjo was put on trial in absentia for alleged involvement in a 1983 coup plot, along with two others; they were sentenced to death, although Biya commuted their sentences to life in prison.
In February 2005, during an away match with Real Zaragoza, Eto'o was the subject of racist taunts by Zaragoza supporters, who began making monkey-like chants whenever he had possession of the ball.
In February 2008, Cameroon experienced its worst violence in 15 years when a transport union strike in Douala escalated into violent protests in 31 municipal areas.
In February 2008, Cameroon experienced widespread violent unrest as a strike by transport workers opposing high fuel prices and poor working conditions coincided with President Paul Biya's announcement that he wanted the constitution to be amended to remove term limits.
In February 2008, he passed a bill that allows for having an additional term in office as president which was followed by civil unrests throughout the country.
In February 2008, riots broke out, calling for lower prices and the departure of Paul Biya as president.
In February 2014, French citizen Michel Thierry Atangana was released from a makeshift Yaoundé prison where, under Biya's orders, he had been arbitrarily detained for 17 years under false claims of embezzlement because of supposed closeness to presidential candidate Titus Edzoa.
In February 2019 he said he wished to continue playing for a further year.
In February 2021, the government claimed that 4,000 Anglophones had applied to join the military, including hundreds of former separatist fighters.
In February, two senior officials were arrested and, along with Ahidjo who was tried in absentia alongside them.
In Jakiri, Bui, Cameroonian soldiers arrested three people and subsequently murdered them.
In January 1984, Biya was elected president of the country, running unopposed.
In January 1999, he was loaned out to Espanyol, but made only one appearance for the club, against Real Valladolid in Copa del Rey.
In January 2017, the Cameroonian government set up a committee to initiate a dialogue with the lawyer activists.
In January 2017, the government ordered a suspension of Internet services in the Northwest and Southwest provinces.
In January 2019, the Social Democratic Front announced it would oppose any future elections in the country while the war is still ongoing.
In January 2024, Cameroon launched the world's first routine malaria vaccine program, using the World Health Organization (WHO)-approved RTS,S vaccine developed by British drugmaker GSK.
In January the same year, the Diocese of Kumbo had been able to document 385 civilian deaths in Kumbo alone within the past seven months.
In July 1884, however, German explorer Gustav Nachtigal staged a coup by signing land-cessation treaties with Kings Akwa, Bell, and Deido.
In July 2018, Cameroonian NGO Human Is Right reported that the war had caused a 70 percent increase in unemployment in the agricultural sector.
In July 2019, UN ambassadors of 37 countries, including Cameroon, signed a joint letter to the UNHRC defending China's treatment of Uyghurs in the Xinjiang region.
In July 2025, Biya filed his candidacy for an eighth term in the 2025 Cameroonian presidential election scheduled in October.
In June 1979, a new law designated the prime minister as the president's constitutional successor, which entailed Biya as the legal successor to Ahidjo should the presidency become vacant intra-term.
In June 2006, at the Greentree estate in Long Island, New York, the countries signed the Greentree Agreement, which required Nigeria to withdraw its troops from Bakassi by 4 August 2008, and also required Cameroon to protect the rights of the Nigerian citizens who lived in Bakassi.
In June 2006, talks concerning a territorial dispute over the Bakassi peninsula were resolved.
In June 2014, Eto'o was selected in Cameroon's squad for the 2014 FIFA World Cup, becoming the third African to participate in four tournaments after compatriots Jacques Songo'o and Rigobert Song.
In June 2018, Cameroon Development Corporation, a state-owned company with 22,000 employees, declared the conflict could lead to the loss of 5,000 jobs on the short term.
In June 2018, the official figure rose to 84 dead.
In June 2019, Switzerland announced that both the Cameroonian government and the separatists had asked it to act as a mediator, and that negotiations would take place.
In June 2019, UNICEF said that 1.3 million people in the Anglophone regions needed humanitarian aid.
In June, Cameroon planned to start rebuilding the Anglophone regions with the support of the UNDP.
In June, the separatists announced that they had started producing their own weapons in the warzone.
In Kembong, just south of Mamfe, a military vehicle hit a road bomb; no soldiers died, but the vehicle was destroyed.
In Kumbo, Cameroonian soldiers killed five people.
In Kumbo, separatist fighters entered a church and held the occupants hostage.
In Makobe, Southwest Region, soldiers of the 21st Battalion killed a separatist fighter known as "Colonel Toless".
In Malende, Kumba, the Cameroonian Army carried out an operation to expel separatists from the area.
In Mamfe, two Ambazonian generals were killed when their camps were raided by the BIR.
In Mamu near Ekona, Muyuka, at least six people were killed and more were wounded in a raid by the Cameroonian Army.
In Manyu, at least seven Cameroonian soldiers were killed and another seven were wounded in a separatist attack on four military checkpoints.
In March 2019, the ADF announced that it would take the war into the French-speaking parts of Cameroon, defying the IG.
In March 2019, the SDF accused members of the Cameroonian government of supporting certain armed elements in the Anglophone regions.
In March 2024, the NGO Human Rights Watch (HRW) denounced “intense repression” by the Cameroonian government against the opposition, after the government of Paul Biya declared the grouping of its main parties in two platforms “illegal”.
In May 1955, the arrests of independence activists were followed by riots in several cities across the country.
In May 2007 in Abuja, the commission finalised the maritime boundary, but in 2015, the Cameroonian government reported that "a few tens of kilometres remain[ed] a stumbling block" in finalising the land boundary.
In May 2014, in the wake of the Chibok schoolgirl kidnapping, Presidents Paul Biya of Cameroon and Idriss Déby of Chad announced they were waging war on Boko Haram, and deployed troops to the Northern Nigerian border.
In May 2014, in the wake of the Chibok schoolgirls kidnapping, presidents Paul Biya of Cameroon and Idriss Déby of Chad announced they were waging war on Boko Haram, and deployed troops to the Nigerian border.
In May 2019, independent sources measured the total number of separatist fighters to be between 2,000 and 4,000, a figure that included numerous ex-soldiers and ex-policemen, a significant number of female combatants, and dozens of Nigerian mercenaries.
In May 2019, the MRC joined the SDF in boycotting National Day celebrations.
In May 2019, the SDF announced it would boycott National Day celebrations in sympathy with people in Southern Cameroons living in a state of civil war.
In Mbatu, near Bamenda, three people were killed by armed separatists.
In Mbengwi, two separatists died while attacking the Divisional Office there.
In Muyuka, an Ambazonian Colonel was killed alongside two other separatist fighters.
In Ngokuv, unknown casualties after the Bui Unity Warriors fired a rocket at an armored car.
In November 1983, Biya announced that the next presidential election would be held on 14 January 1984; it had been previously scheduled for 1985.
In November 2013, he captained the team in their 4–1 aggregate defeat of Tunisia in the play-off to secure World Cup qualification.
In November 2016, major protests broke out in the Anglophone regions of Cameroon.
In November 2019, Biya admitted in a Paris forum of trying to assimilate former British Southern Cameroons into the majority Francophone system, formerly East Cameroon State but failed, due to identity differences, thus triggering the conflict.
In October 1999, when many of the accused were found guilty in the 1997 trial, the faction led by Mukete became more assertive.
In October 2002, the International Court of Justice ruled in favor of Cameroon.
In October 2024, the government dismissed rumors of his death after his absence from public events since the previous month raised concerns.
In Olu, Bui, separatist fighters launched an attack, killing one student and wounding others.
In Parliament, Biya's ruling party on a plurality with 45% of the votes but failed to obtain a majority.
In September 2017, Ambazonian separatists began to take up arms against the government.
In September 2017, the protests and the government's response to them escalated into an armed conflict, with separatists declaring the independence of Ambazonia and starting a guerilla war against the Cameroonian Army.
In September 2019, independent sources stated that the conflict had claimed the lives of around 3,000 people, counting both combatants and civilians.
In September 2020, prominent separatists Mark Bareta and Eric Tataw called for an end to the school boycott.
In September 2021, following an ambush in which 15 soldiers were killed and two armored vehicles destroyed, Cameroon's Defense Minister Joseph Beti Assomo announced a "paradigm shift" in the war.
In September 2021, the Ambazonia Defence Forces gave instructions for schools to reopen.
In September 2024 he received a six-month ban from attending Cameroon international games due to breaching the world governing body's disciplinary code.
In September, President Paul Biya announced the Major National Dialogue, a political dialogue that would be held before the end of the month.
In September, separatists started a guerilla war for the independence of the Anglophone region as the Federal Republic of Ambazonia.
In Sop, Bui, three separatist fighters were killed in a confrontation with the Cameroonian army.
In Swahili, for example, Kitoto kidogo kimekisoma (for comparison, Kamwana kadoko karikuverenga in Shona language) means 'The small child has read it [a book]'.
In Tadu, Bui, a soldier was killed and his weapon seized by separatist fighters.
In a few cases prefixes are used to distinguish languages with the same root in their name, such as Tshilubà and Kiluba (both Luba), Umbundu and Kimbundu (both Mbundu).
In a first time very residential, it has recently witnessed a significant surge in the installation of malls, supermarkets, restaurants and even night clubs.
In a memorandum dated 20 March 1985, Anglophone lawyer and President of the Cameroon Bar Association Fongum Gorji Dinka wrote that the Cameroonian government led by Paul Biya was unconstitutional and announced the former Southern Cameroons should become independent as the Republic of Ambazonia.
In a packed Roumde Adja stadium on Tuesday, September 12, the Indomitable Lions secured their spot in the AfCoN 2024 thanks to goals from Bryan Mbeumo (46'), Christopher Wooh (59'), and Vincent Aboubakar (90+3').
In a particularly lethal raid on 4 September, Cameroonian soldiers killed 27 suspected separatists near Zhoa.
In a popularized form, bikutsi gained mainstream success in the 1950s.
In a separate incident near Buea, a Cameroonian soldier was killed in a separatist IED ambush; the Ambazonia Defence Forces (ADF) claimed responsibility.
In a separate incident, another separatist fighter was killed in a BIR attack between Sabga, Kedjon Ketinguh and Bamessing.
In a typical performance, a chorus of singers echoes a soloist.
In addition to expanding the army, the government has supported local vigilante groups, of which there were more than thirty as of October 2019.
In addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products, such as coffee (33,000 tons) and natural rubber (55,000 tons).
In addition to the official languages, there are between 250 and 280 languages spoken by nearly 20 million Cameroonians.
In addition to the tribal distinctions already noted, the Duala further sort themselves into a number of lineages or clans.
In addition, Kintu is a figure in some mythologies.
In addition, a "queen mother" or mafo was an important figure for some fons in the past.
In addition, at least 250 ethnic Mbororos had been killed as of July 2020, counting both civilians and pro-Cameroonian militants.
In addition, delegates at the African Languages Association of Southern Africa conference in 1984 reported that, in some places, the term Kintu has a derogatory significance.
In addition, individuals who have attended school or lived in an urban centre usually speak French, although English and German were more common in historical periods.
In addition, many other coastal ethnic groups such as Balong, Bakossi and so on – who are culturally and historically more or less related to the Duala – are under Duala influence, and most of these people speak Duala to some extent.
In addition, some Ambazonian militias began partnering with Biafran separatists, who helped them access the arms black market in Nigeria.
In addition, the Duala sometimes include the Bodiman, Pongo, and Wuri among their ranks, but not as sub-lineages.
In addition, the rulers outlawed practices the British viewed as barbaric, such as sacrificing a chief's wives upon his death.
In addition, the shortage of literary critics can be deplored on the continent nowadays.
In addition, traditional faiths are practised by many.
In an end-of-year speech, Samuel Ikome Sako of the Interim Government of Ambazonia declared that an All Ambazonia Constitutional Draft Conference would be held during 2021, and that Northeast and Southwest Region would be reorganized into Equatorial Zone, Midland Zone and Savanna Zone.
In contrast, the Adamawa Plateau, southeastern Bénoué depression, and most of the South Cameroon Plateau are sparsely populated.
In contrast, there are some words in some of the languages in which reduplication has the opposite meaning.
In early July, Cameroon launched "Operation Ngoke-Bui", a series of raids on separatist camps in Ngo-Ketunjia, in which 17 separatists and at least one Cameroonian soldier were killed.
In early September 2017, the Ambazonia Governing Council (AGovC), a separatist movement established in 2013 through the merger of several groups, formally deployed the Ambazonia Defence Forces (ADF) in Southern Cameroons.
In exchange, the Europeans provided alcohol, gunpowder, guns, mirrors, shoes, textiles, and tools.
In exchange, the Europeans provided these rulers with annual gifts of alcohol, guns, textiles, and other goods.
In fact, Biya is credited with a creative innovation in the world of phony elections.
In fact, Jesko von Puttkamer was relieved of duty as governor of the colony due to his untoward actions toward the native Cameroonians.
In his 2008 New Year's message, Biya expressed support for revising the Constitution, saying that it was undemocratic to limit the people's choice.
In his first season, Milla scored 18 goals in 33 regular season matches, which ultimately helped the Montpellier to return to Division 1.
In his mid-thirties Eto'o incorporated an ‘old man’ routine in his goal celebration – a response to jibes by José Mourinho about being too old – where he bent over and started walking slowly with an imaginary cane, with the celebration featuring in EA Sports’ FIFA video game FIFA 18.
In his prime, Eto'o was regarded by pundits as one of the best strikers in the world; he is currently regarded as one of the greatest African players of all time.
In his second season, he scored 11 goals and began to garner attention throughout the league.
In his victory speech, Biya promised to stimulate growth and create jobs with a programme of public works which would "transform our country into a vast construction site".
In late summer, continental air mass dominate again.
In many of the major cities, the streets were deserted due to separatist-imposed ghost towns.
In mid-January, separatists moved to sabotage the postponed 2020 African Nations Championship in Limbe.
In mid-June, Ambazonian forces started a blockade of the Kumba-Buea highway at Ekona, a town located approximately 10 kilometers from Buea.
In mid-June, the Cameroonian Army launched two separate operations that killed a total of 24 separatists over four days; 11 in Mbokam, and 13 in Bali, Batibo and Widikum.
In mid-May, separatists launched an offensive in Bui against the Cameroonian Army, which in turn retaliated by burning down civilian homes in several villages.
In mid-May, the "Fako Mountain Lions" invaded Muyuka and Muea and essentially dared the Cameroonian Army to attack; the subsequent battle saw the deaths of two Cameroonian soldiers.
In northern Cameroon, the Bénoué River runs north and west and empties into the Niger.
In one genetic study, Bamileke-related genetic variations were found throughout Central, Southern and East Africa.
In order to fight the separatist school boycott, according to local sources in Ndop, Cameroonian soldiers have forced children to attend school, often through violence and threats.
In other words, a strong claim for this language family is that almost all words end in a vowel, precisely because closed syllables (CVC) are not permissible in most of the documented languages, as far as is understood.
In particular, English-speaking people are discriminated against; protests often escalate into violent clashes and killings.
In recent times, the distinctiveness of Narrow Bantu as opposed to the other Southern Bantoid languages has been called into doubt, but the term is still widely used.
In recent years there has been a surge in the number of private schools.
In response to pressure from the Bell clan, the French offered other territory in compensation.
In response to the threat from foreign merchants, the British put pressure on the Duala kings to request British annexation.
In response to this, in April 1998 a small faction elected Esoka Ndoki Mukete, a high-ranking member of the Social Democratic Front, as the new chair of the SCNC.
In response, separatists declared a three-day lockdown all across the Anglophone regions.
In separatist-controlled territory, a common social contract is that civilians develop close connections with separatist fighters, who in turn defend them against Cameroonian raids.
In some cases, this has involved a mutual tacit understanding on who controls certain areas; separatist and military checkpoints are sometimes in close proximity of each other, without either side attacking.
In spite of the numerous domestic and international investments, the roads remain in deplorable state largely due to embezzlement and corruption.
In the 1450s, a Luba from the royal family Ilunga Tshibinda married Lunda queen Rweej and united all Lunda peoples.
In the 17th century, the Bamiléké migrated further south and west under the pressure of the Chamba and Fulani people.
In the 17th century, there was a revolt of the Maba people who established a Muslim dynasty.
In the 1950s, during the colonial period, the French built a bridge of 1 km across the river, the longest in the central African sub-region.
In the 1960s, Mongo Beti, Ferdinand Léopold Oyono and other writers explored postcolonialism, problems of African development, and the recovery of African identity.
In the 1980s, South African linguists suggested referring to these languages as KiNtu.
In the 1980s, in Cameroon the struggle for liberalization and multi-party democracy grew.
In the 1990s, both makossa and bikutsi declined in popularity as a new wave of genres entered mainstream audiences.
In the 1990s, the term Kintu was still occasionally used by South African linguists.
In the 19th century, it still had an area of 28,000 km2 (11,000 sq mi).
In the 2000s, leading politicians paid state visits to and from each country; these included President Biya's visit for a conference in 2006 and Hu Jintao's visit to Cameroon in 2007.
In the 2000–01 period, fisheries in the Lake Chad basin provided food and income to more than 10 million people, with a harvest of about 70,000 tons.
In the 2006 World Cup qualifying round, Cameroon were drawn into Group 3 with the Ivory Coast, Egypt, Libya, Sudan and Benin.
In the 2008 Africa Cup of Nations, Eto'o became joint leading goalscorer (along with Laurent Pokou) in the competition's history after scoring his 14th goal with a penalty against Zambia on 26 January 2008.
In the 2010 FIFA World Cup qualifying match against Gabon, Eto'o scored a goal in the 68th minute.
In the 2024 Global Hunger Index (GHI), Cameroon ranks 79th out of 127 countries with sufficient data.
In the 21st century, many jihadist and Islamist groups began to operate in the Central African region, including the Seleka and the Ansaru.
In the British Cameroons, the question was whether to reunify with French Cameroon or join Nigeria; the British ruled out the option of independence.
In the Maghreb, North Africans such as Ibn Khaldun attained great distinction in Arabic literature.
In the Northwest and Southwest provinces, collectively called Ambazonia, 1 October is considered a national holiday, a date Ambazonians consider the day of their independence from Cameroon.
In the October 1997 presidential election, which was boycotted by the main opposition parties, Biya was re-elected with 92.6 percent of the vote; he was sworn in on 3 November.
In the October 2011 presidential election, Biya secured a sixth term in office, polling 77.9% of votes cast.
In the aftermath of the 2025 Cameroonian presidential election, a series of protests broke out after allegations of electoral fraud were made by the opposition.
In the aftermath of the election, a series of protests broke out after allegations of electoral fraud were made by the opposition.
In the beginning of November, 79 students and four staff members were kidnapped from a school in Nkwen, near Bamenda.
In the central area of the basin, the thickness of the sedimentary strata is large, and the thickness of the sedimentary center zone reaches over 10,000 m (33,000 ft).
In the colonial period, Africans who were exposed to Western languages began to write in those languages.
In the days leading up to the 12 March Cameroon senatorial election, separatists blocked roads and carried out a string of lethal attacks against military vehicles.
In the early months of 2021, the separatists began to rely heavily on IEDs while carrying out their ambushes, resulting in heavier Cameroonian casualties.
In the event that a skull is not well preserved, a special ritual must be performed that consists of the pouring out of libation.
In the final tournament, Cameroon were drawn into Group B with Argentina, Romania and the Soviet Union.
In the final tournament, Cameroon were drawn into Group B with Sweden, Brazil and Russia.
In the final, Arsenal goalkeeper Jens Lehmann was sent off early on for bringing down Eto'o just outside the penalty area, but the Catalans struggled to capitalize on their one-man advantage until Eto'o scored the game-tying goal in the second half.
In the final, Cameroon beat Nigeria 3–1 with goals from René N'Djeya, Théophile Abega, and Ernest Ebongué to become champions of Africa for the first time.
In the first months of 2014, thousands of refugees fleeing the violence in the Central African Republic arrived in Cameroon.
In the following days, hundreds of people were detained, and locals accused the military of atrocities.
In the following days, many Anglophones accused the authorities of abuses.
In the following game against Sudan, on 30 January, Eto'o converted another penalty to become the tournament's all-time leading scorer, followed by another goal in the same match that took his Cup of Nations tally to 16.
In the following match, the Derby della Madonnina against Milan, Eto'o won Inter a penalty after being brought down by Gennaro Gattuso in the box; Milito scored the penalty and Gattuso was yellow carded and eventually sent off.
In the knockout stage, M'Boma's goal in the 62nd minute lifted Cameroon over Egypt 1–0.
In the late 1930s, Alexandre Duala Manga Bell had emerged as the unofficial leader of the Duala proper.
In the late 19th century, the Bamum script was developed by Sultan Ibrahim Njoya to write the Bamum (Shüpamom) language.
In the mid-1970s, filmmakers such as Jean-Pierre Dikongué Pipa and Daniel Kamwa dealt with the conflicts between traditional and postcolonial society.
In the north, the Bénoué River is seasonally navigable from Garoua across into Nigeria.
In the north, women tend to the home, and men herd cattle or work as farmers.
In the northern regions, the locally dominant Fulani ethnic group is almost completely Muslim, but the overall population is fairly evenly divided among Muslims, Christians, and followers of indigenous religious beliefs (called Kirdi ("pagan") by the Fulani).
In the past, diviners used the results of these races to predict the future, but today a Christian priest presides instead.
In the plebiscite, 60% of voters in the Northern Cameroons voted for union with Nigeria, while 70% of voters in the Southern Cameroons opted for union with Cameroon.
In the present day, however, this type of construction is mostly reserved for barns, storage buildings, and gathering places for various traditional secret societies.
In the quarter-final match against England, Milla confirmed his super-sub legend by entering in the second half with Cameroon trailing 1–0 and drawing a penalty and then setting up a goal for Ekeke to give Cameroon a 2–1 lead, before England later scored two penalties, to win 3–2 after extra time.
In the quarter-finals, Cameroon faced England.
In the same year the Project Sawa-Beach was launched.
In the same year the city known as Kamerun was renamed Douala and became the capital of the territory until 1902, when the capital was moved to Buéa.
In the second leg of Chelsea's Champions League round of 16 tie with Galatasaray, Eto'o gave the Blues a fourth-minute early lead with his tenth goal of the season, a match they would go on to win 2–0.
In the second round, Cameroon defeated Colombia 2–1 with the 38-year-old Roger Milla scoring two goals in extra-time.
In the semi-arid northern regions (the Sahel) and central highlands the Fulani (French: Peul or Peuhl; Fula: Fulɓe) form an estimated 14% of Cameroonians, while the Kirdi (unbelievers) are a general category, comprising 18% of the population, of various mainly Chadic and Adamawa speakers.
In the semi-finals, Cameroon met Ghana and won the match 2–0 to qualify to the final.
In the south, the principal rivers are the Ntem, Nyong, Sanaga, and Wouri.
In the south, there is continuous open water at the mouth of the Chari River, and the western part of the water is covered by reed swamps, and the sand dunes that are not completely submerged in the eastern waters form an archipelago.
In the south, women grow the family's food, and men provide meat and grow cash crops.
In the stands they have to listen to things that are difficult to explain to a child.
In the subsequent trials, Amnesty International and the SCNC found substantive evidence of admissions through torture and force.
In their effort to make the Anglophone regions ungovernable, separatist elements have maimed employees at state-owned corporations.
In their first game, Cameroon faced Peru and drew 0–0.
In their last game against Russia, the then 42-year-old Roger Milla became the oldest player to play and score in a World Cup finals match.
In their last game, Cameroon were defeated 2–0 by Germany and were narrowly eliminated by the Irish, who had not lost a game.
In their respective New Year speeches on 31 December, President Paul Biya of Cameroon and Samuel Ikome Sako of Ambazonia both promised to intensify the war in 2020.
In this worldview, demi-human water spirits known as Miengu (singular: Jengu) live in the waters and mediate between worshippers and God.
In total, three Cameroonian soldiers and at least 12 separatists died during the three-day offensive.
In turn, they sold these entities (including slaves) to the Europeans, typically aboard their ships (and later at mainland factories or stores).
Inaugurated in 1980 and operating until 2009, the Noma Award for Publishing in Africa was presented for outstanding African writers and scholars published in Africa.
Included are those languages that constitute at least 1% of the population and have at least 10% the number of speakers of the largest Bantu language in the country.
Indeed, the United States Department of Labor Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor reported that 56% of children aged 5 to 14 were working children and that almost 53% of children aged 7 to 14 combined work and school.
Independent petrological and geophysical work indicates magma storage mainly near the crust–mantle boundary along the Cameroon Volcanic Line, consistent with deep-sourced gas release during brief explosive episodes.
Indigenous people known for their Germanophilia were executed in public places.
Individuals could opt to pay a fine to avoid the labour, however, which led to a dearth of workers from the wealthier areas.
Individuals from these informal sectors are by far the most visibly deprived in neighborhoods such as Ndokoti, Bepanda, Village, Logbaba.
Indomitable Lions is the name given to most of the national sporting teams of the African nation of Cameroon.
Inflation below 5% is in green.
Inflation has been brought back under control.
Infuriated again by Zaragoza fans' racist chants the following season, however, Eto'o attempted to walk off the pitch in protest.
Inhabiting many countries, they live mainly in West Africa and northern parts of Central Africa, South Sudan, Darfur, and regions near the Red Sea coast in Sudan.
Initially, Real Madrid President Florentino Pérez wanted to buy back the full transfer rights and loan him out again, but eventually the Barcelona deal proved lucrative enough to warrant a sale.
Inland on the South Cameroon Plateau, cash crops include coffee, sugar, and tobacco.
Inner Niger Delta, an inland delta in Mali Lake Ptolemy, former lake in Sudan List of drying lakes Sudd, vast swamp in South Sudan Wildlife of Chad Lake Chad replenishment project – Proposed major water diversion scheme to prevent the drying up of Lake Chad Hughes, R.
Insects are eaten in some parts of the country, particularly the forested regions.
Instead, modern Bamileke homes are made of bricks of either sun-dried mud or of concrete.
Instead, such individuals are more likely to own property and to have inherited wealth.
Instead, the tournament closed with one last tribute to Foé as Cameroon took a lap around the stadium holding a large photo of their fallen teammate.
Inter went on to win 1–0 with an Eto'o goal in the 39th minute.
Intercity bus services run by multiple private companies connect all major cities.
Interim President Sako of Ambazonia said that the separatists would switch from a defensive to an offensive strategy in the war, and announced that a Mobile Wing Police would be created to capture territory and defeat government militias.
International airports are located in Douala and Yaoundé, with a third under construction in Maroua.
International calls for a global ceasefire to deal with the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic also put pressure on the Cameroonian government.
International criticism has been levied at the United States for their lack of response to the growing Cameroonian crisis.
International river basin organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Introduction to the History of Cameroon in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries.
Irele, Abiola, and Simon Gikandi (eds), The Cambridge History of African and Caribbean Literature, 2 vols, Cambridge [u.a.]: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
Islam is also common in Cameroon, being practiced by about 30% of the population.
Isosceles triangles are prevalent, as they are the known symbol of the leopard.
Israelis also trained personnel at six hospitals in Cameroon on how to combat the Ebola virus.
It also includes one of the two major industrial zones of the city (the other being in Bonaberi).
It connects Douala with the city of Bonabéri and is not only of great economic importance to western Cameroon, carrying auto, truck, and train traffic but also a central tool for international exchanges with landlocked countries like Chad and the Central African Republic.
It covers an area of 581.23 km2 (224.41 sq mi).
It developed in the early 1980s with the housing projects of the Société immobilière du Cameroun (SIC) and is now the prime area for the small but increasing middle and upper classes of the city.
It enjoined the government of French Cameroon to ask France to inform the General Assembly of the United Nations, to abrogate the trusteeship accord concomitant with the independence of French Cameroon.
It gained independence only in 1975, following the 1974 Carnation Revolution in Lisbon.
It has a population of more than 2.8 million, which makes it the second-largest city in the country after the port city Douala.
It has been known since then for housing newcomers in the city from all parts of the country and even from abroad (mainly west Africa).
It has experienced tensions from the English-speaking territories, where politicians have advocated for greater decentralisation and even complete separation or independence (as in the Southern Cameroons National Council).
It has the country's major international airport, Douala International Airport (DLA).
It includes one of the main junctions of the city known as Le Rond-Point Deïdo and the symbol of the city “the Njounjou” (“the monster”).
It is 12 meters high with a wingspan of 5 meters.
It is a member state of the African Union, the United Nations, the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie (OIF), the Commonwealth of Nations, the Non-Aligned Movement, and the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation.
It is a mixed area including many neighborhoods (some wealthier than others) such as Logbaba, Ndogpassi, Cité des Palmiers, PK 8 and many others.
It is a native dish of the Bakweri people from the Southwest region.
It is also reported that most of the Cameroonian teammates and the national head coach Valery Nepomnyashchy who is a Russian did not want Milla to be part of the 1990 FIFA World Cup.
It is also the capital of Cameroon's Littoral Region.
It is also the main opening toward the western anglophone area of the country.
It is an art form that is highly personal in that no two pieces are alike and are often used in dazzling colors that catch the eye.
It is an extensional fault depression type rift basin, which can be divided into four secondary structural units: southern depression, northern depression, central uplift, and eastern slope.
It is an important wetland ecosystem in West-Central Africa.
It is an important wintering ground for European anatidae and wading birds.
It is argued that the Bamileke inheritance customs contributed to their success in the modern world: "Succession and inheritance rules are determined by the principle of patrilineal descent.
It is believed that if someone in the room really is the murderer, the totem will trap their spirit forever.
It is better they aren't exposed to it." On 17 October 2010, in a Serie A game against Cagliari, after just three minutes of play, the referee halted the match to give a warning to some Cagliari fans who were singing racist chants towards Eto'o.
It is clear that Anglophones and Francophones have experienced the crisis differently.
It is connected by the two only bridges of the city.
It is controlled by the Fédération Camerounaise de Football, a member of FIFA and its African confederation CAF.
It is estimated that by June 2020, 740,000 people had been internally displaced as a result of this crisis.
It is formed by the confluence of the Djérem and Lom Rivers in the north of the East Region.
It is important for its deposits of bauxite.
It is interesting to note that there is also a large, informal educational sector that caters to a huge part of the population, mostly individuals with a primary school certificate or those with no education at all.
It is located in the administrative area Bonanjo Doual'art, an art gallery/center La Nouvelle Liberté, a 12m piece from Joseph Francis Sumégné inaugurated in 2007.
It is normally eaten with water fufu (cassava); it is a native dish of the Manyu people from the Southwest region.
It is often sung through narrative epic, occupational verse, ritual verse, and praise poems of rulers and other prominent figures.
It is on the Atlantic Ocean coast approximately 130 miles (210 km) west of Yaoundé.
It is one of the wettest parts of Africa and records Africa's second-highest level of biodiversity.
It is permanently or seasonally inhabited by hundreds of species of birds such as northern shoveler, Egyptian goose and marabou stork.
It is primarily an industrial neighbourhood but is gradually becoming a mixed area including more residential and commercial areas.
It is probably the most inhabited area of the city with many residents having arrived from West Africa and from all parts of the country.
It is supported by the Cameroon National Ports Authority (APN) The Port of Douala is a member of the International Association of Ports and Harbors (IAPH).
It is taught in Cameroon by the Bamum Scripts and Archives Project.
It is the choice of a worker to join any trade union in their occupation since there is more than one trade union in each occupation.
It is the commercial and economic capital of Cameroon and the entire CEMAC region comprising Gabon, Congo, Chad, Equatorial Guinea, Central African Republic and Cameroon.
It is the highest point in sub-Saharan western and central Africa, the fourth-most prominent peak in Africa, and 31st-most prominent in the world.
It is widely believed that the 1992 election was manipulated in his favor, and domestic and international observers have documented evidence of systemic electoral fraud in parliamentary and presidential elections under his administration.
It lies in the Centre Region of the nation at an elevation of about 750 metres (2,500 ft) above sea level.
It shares boundaries with Nigeria to the west and north, Chad to the northeast, the Central African Republic to the east, and Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, and the Republic of the Congo to the south.
It sits on a horst of Precambrian granite and gneiss overlain by Cretaceous to Quaternary sediments.
It then flows about 160 km (99 mi) southeast to the Wouri estuary at Douala, the chief port and industrial city in the southwestern part of Cameroon on the Gulf of Guinea.
It today a very populous neighbourhood with very tough conditions.
It took back its former status of associated territory as a member of the French Union.
It took only a few weeks for Les Têtes Brulées to knock makossa off the Cameroonian charts, and the band even toured France.
It usually denotes short durations, or lower intensity of the action, and also means a few repetitions or a little bit more.
It was also during this tournament that a certain Samuel Eto'o was exposed to Cameroonians.
It was built on the estuary of the Wouri River.
It was founded in the early 20th century with the expropriation by the Germans of the natives Duala people from the plateau Joss.
It was home to Central Africa's largest port, now being replaced by Kribi port.
It was known as the Kanem Empire from the 9th century CE onward and lasted as the independent kingdom of Bornu until 1900.
It was later colonised by European powers in the 20th century.
It was renamed Douala in 1907 after the name of the natives known as Dua ala Ijaws (Njos), and became part of French Cameroon in 1919.
It was reported that Fulani militamen invaded once again the village of Sop in Ndu setting fire to houses, looting stores and attacking villagers, leaving many wounded.
It was revealed that Milla played football solely for leisure, fun and entertainment purposes and did not think seriously of making it as his career and he went onto polish his football skills during school vacations.
It was revealed that Paul Biya wanted Milla to play in the World Cup after watching Milla play in an exhibition charity match which was played at Douala where Milla went on to score two goals.
It was said that Eto'o was unhurt from the accident.
It was the 300th goal in his club career.
It was the Seleção's first group stage loss since a 2–1 defeat to Norway in 1998 and Cameroon's first ever World Cup win since 2002.
It was thought to be related to vegetation loss, global warming, and sea surface temperature anomalies.
It was under the influence of a businessman Adolph Woermann, whose company set up a trading house in Douala, that Bismarck, initially skeptical about the interest of the colonial project, was convinced.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Its average elevation is 1,100 metres (3,609 ft), and its average temperature ranges from 22 °C (71.6 °F) to 25 °C (77 °F) with high rainfall between April and October peaking in July and August.
Its characteristic vegetation is savanna scrub and grass.
Its coastline lies on the Bight of Biafra, part of the Gulf of Guinea, and the Atlantic Ocean.
Its currency is the CFA franc.
Its driest month is December, when on average 28 millimetres (1.1 in) of precipitation falls, while its wettest month is August, when on average nearly 700 millimetres (28 in) of rain falls.
Its foreign policy closely follows that of its main ally, France (one of its former colonial rulers).
Its inhabitants became Cameroonian citizens, and Cameroonian institutions were created under a parliamentary democracy.
Its length is about 603 km (375 mi) from the confluence of Djérem and Lom River.
Its natural features include beaches, deserts, mountains, rainforests, and savannas.
Its rich wildlife consists of 8,260 recorded plant species including 156 endemic species, 409 species of mammals of which 14 are endemic, 690 species of birds which includes 8 endemic species, 250 species of reptiles, and 200 species of amphibians.
Its soils are among Cameroon's most fertile, especially around volcanic Mount Cameroon.
January also saw the start of the trials of the Ambazonian leaders, including Ayuk Tabe, who had spent a year in prison.
January also saw what was possibly the most serious instance of separatist infighting to date; the Southern Cameroons Restoration Forces (loyal to the IG) abducted 40 fighters from the Ambazonia Defence Forces, six of whom were subsequently murdered.
January saw an escalation in guerrilla attacks on symbolic targets, as well as repeated spillover into Nigeria.
Jean-Marie Ahanda became the most influential bikutsi performer of the late 1980s, and he revolutionized the genre in 1987 after forming Les Têtes Brulées, whose success changed the Cameroonian music industry.
Jeanne-Irène Biya died on 29 July 1992 after a short illness while Paul Biya was attending a conference abroad.
John Fru Ndi was his nearest rival, polling 10%.
John Ngu Foncha, the leader of the Kamerun National Democratic Party and the Southern Cameroons elected government represented Southern Cameroons while Ahidjo represented Cameroon.
Johnston, Harry Hamilton, Sir; Grenfell, George (1908).
Journal of West African Languages.
Journalist Emmanuel Freudenthal, who spent a week with ADF rebels in 2018, stated that the separatists controlled much of the countryside because the infrastructure in Southern Cameroons is so poorly developed, making it hard for the Cameroonian government to access those areas.
Journalists have been denied entry to the conflict zones, and soldiers have been forbidden from carrying mobile phones.
Kanem rose in the 8th century in the region to the north and east of Lake Chad.
Karanga, Zezuru, Korekore, Ndau, Manyika) Northern Ndebele (IsiNdebele) (estimated 2 million) Tonga Chewa/ Nyanja (Chichewa/ChiNyanja) Venda Kalanga Xhosa Map 1 shows Bantu languages in Africa and map 2 a magnification of the Benin, Nigeria and Cameroon area, as of July 2017.
Kidnapping for ransom has also occurred frequently, as well as blackmailing of civilians into transferring money to fund the struggle.
Kidnappings of Cameroonian citizens by Central African bandits have increased since 2005.
King Bell's closest ally, kindred and best friend was King Ekandjoum Joseph, whom he visited when he was persecuted by the Germans.
King Bell's successor, King Rudolf Duala Manga Bell tried to rally resistance by sending emissaries to visit the leaders of island groups.
Kingdom on Mount Cameroon: Studies in the history of the Cameroon Coast, 1500–1970 (Berghahn Books, 1996) online.
Kingdoms, fondoms, and chiefdoms arose in the west.
Kinguri became the title of kings of states founded by Queen Rweej's brother.
Known for their elaborate terracotta and bronze artwork and round, walled settlements in the Lake Chad Basin, little else is known with any certainty due to the lack of historical records.
Knöpfli, Hans (1997—2002) Crafts and Technologies: Some Traditional Craftsmen and Women of the Western Grassfields of Cameroon.
Kongo gained captives from the Kingdom of Ndongo in wars of conquest.
Kotto is a modern residential neighbourhood next to Bonamoussadi.
L'imaginaire et l'action dans une ville africaine en crise".
LGBTQ acts are banned by section 347-1 of the penal code with a penalty of from 6 months up to 5 years imprisonment.
Lake Chad (Arabic: بحيرة تشاد, Kanuri: Sádǝ, French: Lac Tchad) is an endorheic freshwater lake located at the junction of four countries: Nigeria, Niger, Chad, and Cameroon, in western and central Africa respectively, with a catchment area in excess of 1,000,000 km2 (390,000 sq mi).
Lake Chad Basin Commission BIOsphere and Heritage of Lake Chad (BIOPALT) project The Ups and Downs of Lake Chad Lake Chad in worldlakes.org Lake Chad in World Lake Database Lake Chad | UN News
Lake Chad is a shallow inland lake, and the rainfall in the Chad basin is very sensitive to small changes in atmospheric circulation, so the surface area of Lake Chad is greatly affected by climate change.
Lake Chad is an endorheic freshwater lake located at the junction of four countries: Nigeria, Niger, Chad, and Cameroon, in western and central Africa respectively, with a catchment area in excess of 1,000,000 km2 (390,000 sq mi).
Lake Chad is divided into deeper southern parts and shallower northern parts.
Lake Chad is divided into north and south parts by a shallow sill called the Great Barrier, with the bottom of the northern basin at an altitude of 275.3 m (903 ft) and the bottom of the southern basin at 278.2 m (913 ft).
Lake Chad is located in the far north of Cameroon.
Language technology can help preserve and promote indigenous Cameroon languages.
Langue et culture de Bafoussam, Paris: L'Harmattan, 255p.
Lanham, Maryland: The Scarecrow Press.
Large German trading companies (Woermann, Jantzen & Thormählen) and concession companies (Südkamerun Gesellschaft, Nord-West Kamerun Gesellschaft) established themselves massively in the colony.
Large cities have significant populations of both groups.
Large mammals on the mountain include the African forest elephant (Loxodonta cyclotis), with a population of over 100 individuals.
Large numbers of Cameroonians live as subsistence farmers.
Large numbers who return to their villages take up cocoa or other cultivation on their own account, thus increasing the general prosperity of the country." In the 1930s, most of the white population still consisted of Germans, most of whom were interned in British camps starting in June 1940.
Later in his reign, the Bornu Empire conquered and made the state a tributary.
Later in the 1960s, modern makossa developed and became the most popular genre in Cameroon.
Later, Gustav Nachtigal made a treaty with one of the local kings to annex the region for the German emperor.
Later, maize (corn) and cassava (manioc) would be introduced to the region via trade with the Portuguese at their ports at Luanda and Benguela.
Laws are passed on a majority vote.
Le Guen's appointment caused an uprise in Cameroon's spirits as they earned a win against Gabon in Libreville, followed by another win against the Panthers four days later in Yaoundé.
Led by Barrister Agbor Balla, Fontem Neba, and Tassang Wilfred, they were protesting against the appointment of Francophone judges in the Anglophone regions.
Legislative elections were held on 23 December 1956 and the resulting Assembly passed a decree on 16 April 1957 which made French Cameroon a state.
Les Têtes Brulées emerged as a reaction against pop-makossa, which was seen as abandoning its roots in favor of mainstream success.
Les Têtes Brulées remained the country's most well known musical export, especially after accompanying the Cameroonian soccer team to the World Cup in 1990 in Italy and 1994 in the United States.
Les Veterans emerged as the most famous bikutsi group in the 1980s while other prominent performers included Titans de Sangmelima, Seba Georges, Ange Ebogo Emerent, Otheo and Mekongo President, who added complex harmonies and jazz influences.
Less than a week after the February election, Cameroonian soldiers and armed Fulani carried out the Ngarbuh massacre, killing at least 23 civilians in Ntumbo, Northwest Region and drawing international condemnation.
Life expectancy at birth is estimated to be 56 years in 2012, with 48 healthy life years expected.
Limbé in the southwest has a natural seaport.
Linguistic analysis, supported by archaeological and genetic research, has shown that the Bantu expansion, a series of migrations that spread Bantu culture across much of Sub-Saharan Africa, most likely originated in the highlands on the Nigeria-Cameroon border around 1000 BCE.
List of African cuisines Food portal
List of current heads of state and government List of heads of the executive by approval rating Official website Cameroon at World Statesmen
List of musical instruments of Cameroon (in French) Audio clips: Traditional music of Cameroon.
Literacy in French for individuals of age 12 and above rose from 41.3% to 57.6% between 1987 and 2005 while that of English rose from 13.4% to 25.3%.
Literary events seem to be very fashionable, including literary awards, some of which can be distinguished by their original concepts.
Literature and films during the next two decades focused more on wholly Cameroonian themes.
Livestock are raised throughout the country.
Local eyewitnesses reported losses on both sides, as well as civilian deaths.
Local governments and traditional authorities are increasingly engaged in rent-seeking, collecting license fees with the help of the police or army.
Local self-sufficient crops include sorghum, maize, finger millet, beans, and vegetables.
Local separatist fighters had consented to the funeral taking place, provided that no Francophone Cameroonians attended it.
Local sources reported more than 30 dead, many of whom were burned alive in their sleep.
Local villagers claimed that 13 civilians were killed in the fighting; this was denied by the Cameroonian Army.
Locals claimed that he was killed by soldiers.
Locals said the attackers identified themselves as the Mountain Lions of Fako.
Logging, largely handled by foreign-owned firms, provides the government US$60 million a year in taxes (as of 1998), and laws mandate the safe and sustainable exploitation of timber.
London: Oxford University Press for the International African Institute.
Low trees of 1 to 15 metres (3 to 50 ft) form open-canopied forests, woodlands, and shrublands, with an understory of small shrubs, herbs, ferns, and climbers.
Low-level violence continued until it was subsumed in the Anglophone Crisis in 2017.
Lower montane forest, also known as submontane forest or cloud forest, grows between 800 and 1,600 metres (2,600 and 5,200 ft) elevation.
Macinnes and Jenny Jakeways (eds), Instability: Planning and Management.
Maho, Jouni Filip NUGL Online.
Major export markets include the Netherlands, France, China, Belgium, Italy, Algeria, and Malaysia.
Makossa developed in Douala and mixes folk music, highlife, soul, and Congo music.
Makossa in the 1980s saw a wave of mainstream success across Africa and, to a lesser degree, abroad as Latin influences, Martinican zouk, and pop music changed its form.
Makossa is a type of funky dance music, best known outside Africa for Manu Dibango, whose 1972 single "Soul Makossa" was an international hit.
Malaria prevented significant European settlement or exploration until the late 1870s, when large supplies of the malaria suppressant quinine became available.
Mallorca won the match 3–0, with Eto'o scoring two late goals to seal the victory.
Mama Ohandja also brought bikutsi to new audiences, especially in Europe.
Mangrove forests, 270,000 hectares (670,000 acres) in size, are along the coast line.
Manikongo António I (1661–1665), with a Kongolese army of 5,000, was destroyed by an army of Afro-Portuguese at the Battle of Mbwila.
Many Bantu languages borrow words from each other, and some are mutually intelligible.
Many Duala still own parts of the city, allowing them to live off rents and development.
Many ethnic groups, particularly speakers of the Grassfields languages in the west, have oral histories of migrating south fleeing Muslim invaders, likely reference to the Fulani War and subsequent conflicts in Nigeria and northern Cameroon.
Many listeners did not like their mellow, almost easy listening-styled bikutsi.
Many observers were surprised, as Biya is a Christian from the south while Ahidjo was a Muslim from the North and Ahidjo was only 59 years old.
Many of the Ijaw (Njo) natives migrated to the Niger Delta in Nigeria during the Portuguese era.
Many of these are frequented by the city's large expatriate population, mainly French or Lebanese, most of whom work in the petroleum industry.
Many of these measures have been painful; the government slashed civil service salaries by 65% in 1993.
Many opposition groups reported additional harassment and restrictions on speech, gatherings, and political activity in the wake of the protests.
Many other civilians were abducted the same day by suspected separatists in the town.
Many separatist militias, including the ADF and SOCADEF, are directly commanded by diaspora leaders in the United States, Norway, Germany and other countries; aid agencies have oftentimes had to negotiate with these leaders over the phone, rather than with separatists on the ground.
Many separatists and federalists hoped that the crackdown would lead to an international military intervention against the Cameroonian government.
Many trees have buttress roots.
Many were written at the famous University of Timbuktu.
Marriages typically involve a bride price to be paid to the bride's family.
Masquerades are an integral part of Bamileke culture and expression.
May saw the Anglophone Crisis get some international attention.
Mazrui et al., "The development of modern literature since 1935".
Meanwhile, Biya thanked the population of the Anglophone regions for assisting the government in the fight against separatists, and called on other countries to crack down on separatist activities in the diaspora.
Meanwhile, Dibongo and his companions migrated southeast to the Sanaga River and then split up, some heading upstream with Dibongo and others moving downstream with a man named Elimbe.
Meanwhile, Henri Dikongué, whose music incorporated, amongst others, bikutsi and makossa, began to release albums which met international success.
Meanwhile, a leadership crisis erupted within the IG, forcing smaller separatist movements to pick their loyalties.
Meanwhile, in anticipation of the Cameroonian presidential election on 7 October, the separatists started enforcing a lock-down of their own, blocking major highways with trees or car wrecks.
Meanwhile, infighting among the Ambazonia separatists had significantly increased, as had rebel attacks on civilians.
Meanwhile, other Cameroonian ethnic groups had caught up to the Duala's lead in education and Westernisation.
Meanwhile, the opposition has been vocal in its criticism of the government's handling of the conflict.
Meanwhile, the war continued; on 20 September, separatist fighters launched a failed attack on a hotel in Bamenda where several government officials were staying.
Meanwhile, two explosive devices detonated in Yaoundé, raising suspicions that the separatists were now taking the war to Cameroon's capital; the Cameroonian police had warned about this back in January.
Meat and fish are popular but expensive additions, with chicken often reserved for special occasions.
Media related to Culture of Cameroon at Wikimedia Commons The portal of Cameroon on the SPLA Sud Planète database managed by Africultures KAMERCULTURES
Media related to Douala at Wikimedia Commons Official Douala website Satellite image of Douala from Google Earth Duala Language website jw .
Media related to History of Cameroon at Wikimedia Commons Map of German Cameroon (Kamerun) in 1914 at the Wayback Machine (archived 4 April 2013)
Medics spent 45 minutes attempting to restart his heart, and although he was still alive upon arrival at the stadium's medical centre, he died shortly afterwards.
Medieval North Africa boasted universities such as those in Fes and Cairo, with extensive literature to supplement them.
Meeussen's rule Nguni languages Proto-Bantu Swadesh list Biddulph, Joseph (2001).
Mefo was charged with "publishing and propagating information that infringes on the territorial integrity of the Republic of Cameroon," but was released and charges were dropped on 12 November after her arrest was condemned by both local and international media groups.
Men typically clear the fields, but it is largely women who work them.
Messi Martin was a Cameroonian guitarist who had been inspired to learn the instrument by listening to Spanish language-broadcasts from neighboring Equatorial Guinea, as well as Cuban, and Zairean rumba.
Messi changed the electric guitar by linking the strings together with pieces of paper, thus giving the instrument a damper tone which emitted a "thudding" sound similar to the balafon.
Messi's style was immediately popular, and his hits, like "Mengalla Maurice" and "Bekono Nga N'Konda," became radio favorites throughout the country beginning in the early 1960s.
Middle Africa is an analogous term used by the United Nations in its geoscheme for Africa and consists of the following countries: Angola, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Republic of the Congo, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, and São Tomé and Príncipe.
Middlemen of the Cameroons Rivers: The Duala and their Hinterland, c.
Midnight to 31 July, the ten detained members of the IG, including Ayuk Tabe, went on a hunger strike over the missing convicts.
Migration to the city of Yaoundé, for example, was a major cause for the popularization of bikutsi music.
Milla frequently celebrated goals by running to the corner flag and performing a dance similar to the lambada.
Milla left French football at the age of 37 in 1989 and moved to Réunion in the Indian Ocean where he played for JS Saint-Pierroise.
Milla made his first appearance for Cameroon in 1973 versus Zaire in a World Cup qualifier.
Milla played an instrumental role in helping Cameroon to qualify for the 1982 World Cup by top scoring in the 1982 FIFA World Cup qualification for the African Zone competition.
Milla returned to the 1994 FIFA World Cup at the age of 42, being the oldest player ever to appear in a World Cup until the 2014 tournament when Colombia's Faryd Mondragón entered in a group stage match versus Japan when 43 years and 3 days old.
Milla scored 42 goals in 133 competitive matches and was instrumental in assisting the club to win the 1981 French Cup.
Milla scored all his four goals in the tournament as a substitute as he started every game of the tournament on the bench.
Milla was also an integral member of the Cameroonian squad which won the 1984 African Cup of Nations where Cameroon defeated Nigeria 3-1 in the final to secure Cameroon's first ever continental title.
Milla was capped 77 times for the national team, scoring 43 goals.
Modern Geography of the Republic of Cameroon (3rd ed.).
Mondragon's record in turn was beaten by Essam El Hadary in 2018.
Montane forests and savannas are in the northern region of the country.
Montane grassland occurs between 2,000 and 3,000 metres (6,600 and 9,800 ft) elevation.
Montane scrub grows between 1,800 and 2,400 metres (5,900 and 7,900 ft) elevation.
More evolved magma was erupted from vents at roughly 1,960 m elevation while more mafaic magma drained from lower vents around 1,500 m, so that the magmas did not mix.
More narrowly, they fall into the Sawa, or the coastal peoples of Cameroon.
More than 100 inmates were moved to undisclosed locations for detention, some of whom were subjected to torture, and there were speculations that some had been killed during the riots.
More than 13,000 Anglophone Cameroonians living in Maryland protested against the Cameroonian government crackdown.
More than 30,000 people in northern Cameroon fled to Chad after ethnic clashes over access to water between Musgum fishermen and ethnic Arab Choa herders in December 2021.
More than 75% of Cameroon's industrial strength is located in Douala and Bonabéri.
More than a hundred fighters participated in the attack, and they arrived in flying boats with the engines shut off in order not to make noise.
Moreover, the Oroko language is classified as a Duala language, seems to be closely related to Batanga region of kribi and Bakweri (Mokpwe), which is a Duala language.
Most Bamiléké historical narratives detail an origin along the Nile River in what is now Sudan.
Most agriculture is done at the subsistence scale by local farmers using simple tools.
Most children have access to state-run schools that are cheaper than private and religious facilities.
Most converted to Protestantism and were schooled along German lines.
Most fishing products are dried, pickled, or smoked.
Most languages are referred to in English without the class prefix (Swahili, Tswana, Ndebele), but are sometimes seen with the (language-specific) prefix (Kiswahili, Setswana, Sindebele).
Most native speakers of Swahili live in Tanzania, where it is a national language, while as a second language, it is taught as a mandatory subject in many schools in East Africa, and is a lingua franca of the East African Community.
Most of Bamenda was also closed down, with smaller clashes taking place.
Most of the 260 languages spoken in Cameroon are indigenous languages.
Most of the Ubangian speakers in Africa (often grouped with Niger-Congo) are also found in Central Africa, such as the Gbaya, Banda and Zande, in northern Central Africa.
Most of the precipitation comes from the Adamawa Plateau in the south of the basin, which is transported to the lake basin through the Chari River and the Logone River.
Most people in the English-speaking Northwest and Southwest provinces speak Cameroonian Pidgin English, also called Kamtok, as a lingua franca.
Most work is done with tools such as machetes and hoes.
Mount Cameroon National Park (Parc National du Mont Cameroun) was created in 2009.
Mount Cameroon erupts predominantly basanite and alkali basalt, with small amounts of hawaiite, mugearite and camptonite.
Mount Cameroon is also known as Cameroon Mountain or Fako (the name of the higher of its two peaks) or by its indigenous name Mongo ma Ndemi ("Mountain of Greatness").
Mount Cameroon is also known as Cameroon Mountain or Fako or by its indigenous name Mongo ma Ndemi.
Mount Cameroon is among Africa’s most active volcanoes, with eight major eruptions during the twentieth century.
Mount Cameroon is an active stratovolcano in the Southwest Region of Cameroon next to the city of Buea near the Gulf of Guinea.
Mount Cameroon is ranked 22nd by topographic isolation.
Mount Cameroon is the highest peak in West and Central Africa.
Mount Cameroon is the youngest and only presently active volcano on the line.
Mount Cameroon lies on the Cameroon Volcanic Line, a 1,600 km (990 mi) NE–SW belt of oceanic and continental volcanoes stretching from Pagalu Island in the Gulf of Guinea to northern Cameroon.
Much of the country remains without reliable power supplies.
Much of the lowland forest has been converted to agriculture and agroforestry, including oil palm plantations.
Music and dance are integral parts of Cameroonian ceremonies, festivals, social gatherings, and storytelling.
Musicians continued to add innovations, however, and improved recording techniques; Nkondo Si Tony, for example, added keyboards and synthesizers while Elanga Maurice added brass instruments.
Muslims are most concentrated in the north, while Christians are concentrated primarily in the southern and western regions, but practitioners of both faiths can be found throughout the country.
Muslims in Cameroon are divided into Sufis, Salafis, Shias, and non-denominational Muslims.
Musée d'ethnographie de Genève.
NY: Cambridge University Press.
National policy strongly advocates sport in all forms.
Native traditional religions are practised in rural areas throughout the country but rarely are practised publicly in cities, in part because many indigenous religious groups are intrinsically local.
Natives complained that this made them a neglected "colony of a colony".
Ndongo experienced depopulation from slave raiding.
Ndongo was ruled by the ngola.
Ndongo would also engage in slave trading with the Portuguese, with São Tomé being a transit point to Brazil.
Ndumb'a Lobe of the Bell lineage propped himself up in the 19th century as King Bell.
Neither side was particularly satisfied as Ahidjo had wanted a unitary or more centralized state while the West Cameroonians had wanted more explicit protections.
Nevertheless, in practice, the industry is one of the least regulated in Cameroon.
Nevertheless, many Cameroonian languages have alphabets or other writing systems, many developed by the Christian missionary group SIL International, who have translated the Bible, Christian hymns, and other materials.
Nevertheless, on 10 April 2008, the National Assembly voted to change the Constitution to remove term limits.
Nevertheless, remnants of a pre-Christian ancestor worship persist.
Nevertheless, the trial resumed.
New Bell is an historical neighbourhood of the city.
New Delhi: Idea Publishing, 2017.
New York City: Palgrave Macmillan.
New York: Columbia University Press.
News reporters were unable to identify the man or reason behind the attack, which did not appear to cause any serious injury.
Newspapers routinely self-censor to avoid government reprisals.
Ngoh, Victor Julius (1996) History of Cameroon Since 1800.
Nigeria and Niger, which had just gained independence, experienced continuous coups, while Chad also experienced ongoing civil war.
Nigeria pointed to other colonial-era documents and agreements and their long history of administration to object to this narrative.
Nigeria, on the other hand, argued that the peninsula had been the territory of the chiefs of Old Calabar, who had transferred their title to Nigeria upon its independence.
Nigerian forces were later deployed to oust the Ambazonians, but they were unable to reach Belegete with a sizeable force due to the topography and the poor infrastructure, and camped at the Obudu Mountain Resort.
Nigerian migrant workers flocked to Southern Cameroons, ending forced labour altogether but angering the local natives, who felt swamped.
Nigerian music has influenced Anglophone Cameroonian performers, and Prince Nico Mbarga's highlife hit "Sweet Mother" is the top-selling African record in history.
Nigerians make up the largest group of foreign nationals.
Nine people were killed in clashes all across the Anglophone regions that day, while "Field Marshall" Lekeaka Oliver of the Red Dragon militia used the occasion to declare himself Paramount Ruler of Lebialem.
No one claimed responsibility for the attack, and the Cameroonian government and the separatist movements blamed each other.
No one was wounded in the attack, although several bullets penetrated into the cabin.
No separatist group claimed responsibility.
Nomadic herders migrate with their animals into the grasslands of the northern part of the basin for a few weeks during each short rainy season, where they intensively graze the highly nutritious grasses.
Northern Cameroons consisted of two non-contiguous sections, divided by a point where the Nigerian and Cameroon borders met and were governed as part of the Northern Region of Nigeria.
Northern Muslims were the primary participants in this coup attempt, which was seen by many as an attempt to restore that group's supremacy.
Northwest Bantu is more divergent internally than Central Bantu, and perhaps less conservative due to contact with non-Bantu Niger–Congo languages; Central Bantu is likely the innovative line cladistically.
Northwest Bantu is not a coherent family, but even for Central Bantu the evidence is lexical, with little evidence that it is a historically valid group.
Notable Cameroonian articles of clothing include: Pagnes, a sarongs worn by Cameroon women, Chechia, a traditional hat, Kwa, a male handbag and Gandura, male custom attire.
Notable Central African supra-regional organizations include the Lake Chad Basin Commission and the Economic Community of Central African States.
Noteworthy Cameroonian dresses include Pagnes, sarongs worn by Cameroon women; Chechia, a traditional hat; kwa, a male handbag; and Gandura, male custom attire.
Notwithstanding, it is beyond doubt that separatist elements have carried out numerous such acts, sometimes drawing condemnation from the Interim Government of Ambazonia.
Noun Classification in Swahili Archived 2020-10-26 at the Wayback Machine.
November also saw several major confrontations.
Numerically and materially disadvantaged, the separatists carry out hit-and-run attacks, ambushes and raids.
Numerous regional political groups have since formed.
Numerous states claimed descent from the Lunda.
Nurse & Philippson (2006) evaluate many proposals for low-level groups of Bantu languages, but the result is not a complete portrayal of the family.
Nurse, Derek; Philippson, Gérard (2006).
Nurses are unemployed even though their help is needed.
OCHA also estimates that at least 628,000 people have been internally displaced by violence in the two regions, while more than 87,000 have fled to Nigeria.
October also saw the public surrender of Ambazonian general Ekeom Polycarp, who was subsequently assassinated by other separatists.
Of these, 49,300 were from the Central African Republic (many driven west by war), 41,600 from Chad, and 2,900 from Nigeria.
Official results claimed 98.2% turnout and 99.99% of votes in favor of the new constitution.
Officials clarified that he was in Geneva and in good health.
Oil is also a major export of the countries of northern and eastern Central Africa, notably making up a large proportion of the GDPs of Chad and South Sudan.
Oil remains a primary driver of the economy, though the country is not as oil-dependent as many other producers in the region.
Oliver resurfaced in a video a week later, proving that reports of his death were false.
Olivine phenocrysts make up around 10 % of these lavas; clinopyroxenes classify as diopside, and plagioclase crystals range from bytownite to andesine.
On 1 December 2009, Eto'o finished fifth in voting for the Ballon d'Or, which was won by his former Barcelona teammate Lionel Messi.
On 1 December, separatist fighters carried out their first attack on an airplane, firing at a Camair-Co passenger plane while it was landing at Bamenda Airport.
On 1 December, the Cameroonian government ordered the evacuation of 16 villages in Manyu ahead of a military offensive, and on 4 December it formally declared war on the separatists.
On 1 January 1960, French Cameroun gained independence from France under President Ahmadou Ahidjo as the Republic of Cameroon.
On 1 January, writing from the Kondengui Central Prison, Sisiku Julius Ayuk Tabe (the first president of Ambazonia) called for an end of the Ambazonian leadership crisis and unity among separatist factions.
On 1 July, two soldiers were killed in Munyenge, Muyuka.
On 1 June 2008, Eto'o headbutted reporter Philippe Bony following an incident at a press conference.
On 1 June, at least five Cameroonian soldiers were killed in a separatist ambush in Otu, Manyu.
On 1 June, separatist fighters killed an official in a roadside ambush in Donga-Mantung.
On 1 March, Cameroonian soldiers raped 20 women, killed one man, and burned and plundered houses in Ebam, Southwest Region.
On 1 March, the trial took a diplomatic twist; a Nigerian court determined that the deportation of the Ambazonian leadership had been unconstitutional, and ordered their return to Nigeria.
On 1 May, Cameroon announced the deaths of two separatist commanders known as General Alhaji and General Peace Plant; separatists confirmed the loss.
On 1 May, separatist fighters abducted 28 people (including eight children) from the Catholic Church of Bai Panya in Meme.
On 1 May, separatist fighters attacked a checkpoint in Matouke, Littoral Region, killing five soldiers or police officers and one civilian, and wounding many others.
On 1 October 1961, the formerly British Southern Cameroons gained independence from the United Kingdom by vote of the UN General Assembly and merged into the Republic of Cameroon to form the Federal Republic of Cameroon.
On 1 October 1999, militants took over Radio Buea to proclaim the independence of Southern Cameroons, but failed to do so before security forces intervened.
On 1 October, separatists across the Anglophone regions celebrated Ambazonia's independence day with parades and meetings.
On 1 October, the Southern Cameroons Ambazonia Consortium United Front (SCACUF), an umbrella movement consisting of several independence movements, unilaterally declared the independence of Ambazonia.
On 10 April, a battle took place in Kumbo: At night, a group of rebels stormed Kumbo and attacked the local BIR base, resulting in several deaths.
On 10 August, following the deaths of two separatist fighters in Bangulan, Ngo-Ketunjia, separatist commander "General No Mercy" declared an indefinite lockdown in the village.
On 10 July, two separatist fighters, including a leader known as ''Commander Iron'', were killed during a military operation in Bamenda.
On 10 June 1840 and 7 May 1841, Akwa and Bell became the first to sign anti-slavery treaties.
On 10 June, suspected separatist fighters killed a bike rider and abducted a passenger in Bamenda.
On 10 May, separatist fighters assassinated the newly elected mayor of Mamfe, Ashu Priestly Ojong, and hours later the chief of the Babeke Telecentre, Kimi Samson, was murdered as well by suspected separatists.
On 10 May, separatists killed six gendarmes in Eyumodjock, including a commander, and seized weapons and uniforms.
On 10 October 2002, after more than eight years of hearings and deliberations, the court ruled in favour of Cameroon, instructing Nigeria to withdraw immediately from the region.
On 11 December 1982, he was placed in charge of managing party affairs in Ahidjo's absence.
On 11 December 2021, Eto'o was elected President of the Cameroonian Football Federation (FECAFOOT).
On 11 December, Fon Richard Muntong III of Bamessing issued an ultimatum where he demanded that all separatist fighters leave his village by 31 December.
On 11 February, one person was killed and dozens more were injured, including children, in an explosion during Youth Day celebrations in Nkambe.
On 11 January, a gendarme officer shot a civilian dead in Mamfe.
On 11 July, at least seven separatist fighters were killed in Esu.
On 11 November, Cameroonian soldiers tortured a group of civilians in Ngoketunjia for several hours, killed one of them, and looted his possessions.
On 11 November, according to the separatists, 13 Cameroonian soldiers and two separatists were killed when separatists carried out a successful ambush.
On 11 October, Cameroon initiated a three-day offensive against separatists in Wabane, Lebialem.
On 11 September, separatists took control of two neighborhoods of Buea, blocking the main entrances to the city and killing a soldier from the Rapid Intervention Brigade (BIR).
On 12 February 1961, the results of the Southern Cameroon plebiscite were announced and it was learned that Southern Cameroons had voted for unification with the Republic Of Cameroon, sometimes called "reunification" since both regions had been part of German Kamerun.
On 12 January, The Mali national football team suspended training before the AFCON game against Tunisia following clashes between separatists and the Cameroon Armed Forces in Buea, killing two.
On 12 July, Ambazonian Field Marshall Lekeaka Oliver, leader of the Red Dragons, was killed in Menji.
On 12 June 1958, the Legislative Assembly of French Cameroon asked the French government to: "Accord independence to the State of Cameroon at the ends of their trusteeship.
On 12 June 2006, he signed the Greentree Agreement with Nigerian president Olusegun Obasanjo which formally put an end to the Bakassi peninsula border dispute.
On 12 March, two civilians were killed in a suspected separatist attack on a Brasseries du Cameroun truck in Bamenda.
On 12 May, a soldier from the Rapid Intervention Brigade reportedly shot at civilians in a Limbe nightclub, killing one and wounding two, in revenge for the killings of his fellow soldiers in Bamenda by separatist fighters.
On 12 November 1958, France asked the United Nations to grant French Cameroon independence and end the Trusteeship.
On 12 October, seven separatist fighters from Widikum surrendered and joined the Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration Centre in Bamenda.
On 13 December, two police officers were seriously injured in a clash with separatist fighters in Bamenda.
On 13 January, separatist fighters shot and tortured a civilian in Menchum, after accusing him of passing information to the Cameroonian military.
On 13 July, a separatist militia known as the "Gorilla Fighters" led by "General Ayeke" abducted 63 civilians from Mmuock Leteh, Lebialem.
On 13 June, separatist commander Besaka Belget (known as "General Black Bat") was killed by Cameroonian forces in Kombone Bakundu, Meme.
On 13 March 1959, the United Nations’ General Assembly resolved that the UN Trusteeship Agreement with France for French Cameroon would end when French Cameroon became independent on 1 January 1960.
On 14 April, four Cameroonian soldiers and three separatist fighters were killed in Bali.
On 14 August 1961, the federal constitution was adopted, with Ahidjo as president.
On 14 August, five cabs were set on fire by unidentified gunmen in Bamenda.
On 14 August, in an effort to sabotage the new school year, separatist militias announced that region-wide lockdowns would be enforced on 2–6 September and 9–13, covering the first two weeks of the academic year.
On 14 August, villagers killed 17 separatist fighters in Nguti, Koupé-Manengouba.
On 14 December, separatists imposed a lockdown in Bamenda to mourn one of their members killed a few weeks earlier by security forces.
On 14 February 2009, he scored his 99th and his 100th league goals for Barcelona in a 2–2 draw with Real Betis.
On 14 January, explosions were heard outside Limbe Omnisport Stadium.
On 14 July, separatist fighters killed a young man and abducted his brother in Bamenda.
On 14 May, suspected separatist fighters raided a school in Ndu and abducted two teachers.
On 14 November 2009, Cameroon defeated the Atlas Lions of Morocco 2–0 in Fez in their last match of their campaign.
On 14 November, separatist fighters abducted Langsi Abel, a former mayor of Bafut.
On 15 April, separatist fighters abducted two teachers in Njap, Donga-Mantung.
On 15 August, at least seven soldiers from the BIR were injured when their vehicle skidded off the road in Kumba; while separatists claimed responsibility for the incident, the army claimed it was simply a road accident.
On 15 December, at least five separatists were summarily executed, possibly by fellow separatists.
On 15 July, suspected separatists set fire to the palace of Chief Ewome John Eko in Bwassa, Southwest Region, resulting in the destruction of one section of the complex.
On 15 May, ADF fighters attacked a school and burned materials.
On 15 November, armed men burned a man to death on Ayaba Street in Bamenda using tyres.
On 16 August, separatist fighters imposed a blockade on the Kumba-Mamfe road.
On 16 August, separatists attacked a convoy transporting a member of parliament in Babungo, Ngo-Ketunjia Department, killing at least four soldiers.
On 16 December 2011, Eto'o was suspended 15 games by the Cameroonian Football Federation, after the team refused to play a friendly against Algeria earlier in the year.
On 16 July, gunmen killed ten people and injured another two at a busy junction in Bamenda.
On 16 June, a former separatist fighter was killed by ADF in Bamenda.
On 16 March 2011, Eto'o gave a legendary performance in Munich as he helped Inter eliminate Bayern Munich 3–2 (with an aggregate score of 3–3, winning on away goals) in the Champions League.
On 16 May, a brigade commander and a gendarme were killed in a separatist attack in Akwaya, Manyu.
On 16 October, separatists executed two alleged gang members in Bali Nyonga, after a mob had seized them and handed them over to the separatists.
On 16 September, two separatist fighters were killed during an operation by the Rapid Intervention Brigade (BIR) in Worsing, Bali Nyonga.
On 16–17 February, eight separatists were killed during military operations in the locality of Ayukaba.
On 17 June, a nurse was killed by ADF fighters in Bafut.
On 17 May, four separatist fighters were killed during a government offensive in Mbveh and Ndzenji, Bui.
On 17 November, separatist fighters attacked a vehicle on the Ndu-Foumban road, killing two civilians and a soldier.
On 17 October 2007, he earned his Spanish passport.
On 17 October, SDF President John Fru Ndi's house in Bamenda was set on fire by armed men.
On 17 October, in the midst of his recovery period, he gained Spanish citizenship.
On 18 December, the Cameroonian Army began to destroy dozens of civilian homes in retaliation, and killed several civilians.
On 18 December, the Nigerian Army arrested four suspected Ambazonian separatists in Takum, Taraba State, Nigeria.
On 18 February, seven Cameroonian soldiers were killed by an IED in Babessi.
On 18 January 2006, Biya initiated an anti-corruption drive under the direction of the National Anti-Corruption Observatory.
On 18 June, the ADF set fire to a cab in Bamenda.
On 18 October, six suspected Ambazonian separatists were arrested by Nigerian police in Akamkpa, Cross River State.
On 19 August, it was reported that Cameroonian forces carried out a combined ambush and targeting operation between Ndop and Bamessing, Ngo Kentunjia.
On 19 August, it was reported that more than 130 ex-separatist fighters had escaped from re-integration centers.
On 19 December 1929, four paramount chiefs sent a petition to the League of Nations asking for independence for the Cameroons.
On 19 July, at least four armed separatists, including a deputy commander, were killed in a military offensive in Alabukam, Bamenda.
On 19 June 2010, Eto'o scored a goal in Cameroon's 2010 World Cup group stage match against Denmark, from a mistake by Christian Poulsen.
On 19 May, clashes between separatist fighters and Cameroonian forces left three people dead, including a separatist, a soldier and a young child in Akum, Mezam.
On 19 May, one of the imprisoned members of the original cabinet of the IG, Barrister Shufai, who had been transferred to a hospital four days prior, was chained up and mistreated by guards.
On 19 October 1958, France recognized the right of its United Nations trust territory to choose independence.
On 19 September, a suspected separatist IED detonated and numerous gunshots erupted in Bamenda.
On 1–2 January, following President Paul Biya's announcement in his New Years' speech that the Cameroonian military was crushing the Ambazonian rebellion, separatists moved to enforce local lockdowns.
On 1–3 February, separatists carried out a string of attacks in Bamessing, Oku, Nkambe, Kumbo, Kom and Nkambe, using improvised explosive devices (IEDs).
On 2 December 2022, in the final match of Group G, The Indomitable Lions made history by becoming the first African country to defeat Brazil at the World Cup.
On 2 July, Cameroonian officials met with the imprisoned leaders of the IG to discuss a ceasefire.
On 2 June 1909, the Wadai capital of Abéché was occupied by the French.
On 2 March, seven people including a Divisional Officer, and a mayor were killed in a separatist IED ambush in Ekondo-Titi, Southwest Region.
On 2 November, the BIR opened two new bases in Nguti and Alou, with the aim of combating ghost towns and increasing security along the Kumba-Mamfe road.
On 2 September, separatist fighters killed a biker and burnt down a taxi in Buea.
On 20 August, separatist commander Tantoh Leonard (known as "General Colabo") was killed by his own fighters in Ndop, following a dispute over the distribution of ransom money.
On 20 August, the ten detained members of the IG, including Ayuk Tabe, were sentenced to life imprisonment by the Yaoundé Military Tribunal.
On 20 March, Cameroonian soldiers freed two Cameroonian and one Tunisian hostage in Meme Department.
On 20 May, during Cameroon's National Day, separatist fighters killed the mayor and two other people in Belo.
On 20 May, in an effort to boycott celebrations of Cameroon's National Day, Ambazonian forces struck in several villages throughout Southern Cameroons, including Konye, Batibo and Ekona, and abducted the mayor of the town of Bangem.
On 20 May, multiple clashes between the Cameroon Army and separatists took place in the English-speaking regions of Cameroon during the National Day.
On 21 August 1986, one of these, Lake Nyos, belched carbon dioxide and killed between 1,700 and 2,000 people.
On 21 August 2010, Eto'o scored twice as Inter beat Roma 3–1 to win the Supercoppa Italiana.
On 21 August, in a video, the separatist group Mountain Lions declared a two-week lockdown starting on 9 September in order to disrupt school resumption.
On 21 December, ADF General Ivo Mbah was killed during a military raid in Kumba.
On 21 February 1960, the new nation held a constitutional referendum, approving a new constitution.
On 21 February, one person was killed during clashes in Banga Bakundu.
On 21 January, it was confirmed that Cameroonian forces had captured top ADF commander "General Efang".
On 21 July, the ADF attacked the office of the Divisional Officer in Jakiri, Bui.
On 21 June, it was reported that Cameroonian forces had used civilians in Melim to search for IEDs, resulting in the deaths of two civilians.
On 21 October, Biya was shown on state television arriving at Yaoundé Nsimalen International Airport following his return from Switzerland.
On 22 July, separatist inmates at Kondengui Central Prison took part in staging a protest against the prison conditions.
On 22 May 2010, Eto'o played in the third Champions League final of his career, as Inter won 2–0 over Bayern Munich to win the first title in 45 years; Milito scored both goals, with Eto'o setting up the second.
On 22 November, around 40 Ambazonian fighters and unarmed civilians were killed in Bali by government soldiers, who then set their corpses on fire.
On 22 September, Cameroonian soldiers killed six civilians in Buea, allegedly for not showing them the locations of separatist hideouts.
On 22 September, Cameroonian soldiers opened fire on protesters, killing at least five and injuring many more.
On 22–23 March, a local elected official was shot dead in Babessi, in an attack claimed by separatists.
On 23 August 2011, Russian club Anzhi Makhachkala reached an agreement with Inter to sign Eto'o in a three-year deal that made him the world's highest-paid player, with a salary of €20 million (after taxes) per season.
On 23 August, suspected separatists burned a taxi in Bamenda.
On 23 December, Cameroonian soldiers arrested three people in Bamenda.
On 23 July, a single mother was killed by suspected separatist fighters in Bamenda.
On 23 March 1997, about ten people were killed in a raid on a gendarme camp in Bamenda.
On 23 March 2013, Eto'o scored his first goal for Cameroon in 16 months with a penalty kick against Togo in a 2014 World Cup qualifier.
On 23 October, the Cameroonian Army launched simultaneous attacks on seven or more separatist camps in the Northwest Region, initiating battles that continued for more than 24 hours.
On 24 April, gunmen burned down the house of the mayor of Fundong.
On 24 April, separatist general Desmond Koa (known as "General Mad Dog") was killed along with four of his fighters by the Rapid Intervention Brigade in Mbonge, Ndian.
On 24 August, at least three police officers were killed in Buea.
On 24 February, at least two soldiers were killed and at least another five were wounded in a separatist ambush in Kumbo with IEDs followed by gunfire.
On 24 February, separatists abducted the government's regional representative for social affairs in the Northwest Region, apparently looking to exchange him for imprisoned separatist activists.
On 24 January, General Andrew Ngoe of SOCADEF was killed in Matoh, Mbonge.
On 24 January, suspected separatists burned a road construction equipment in Ndu.
On 24 May, Cameroonian soldiers killed at least 30 people while storming a hotel in Pinyin.
On 24 May, it was reported that separatists had abducted 30 women in Babanki days prior.
On 24 May, the Cameroonian Army claimed to have killed separatist commander "General Akwaba" and an unspecified number of fighters in a raid on their camp in Kumbo.
On 24 May, the Cameroonian military set up a military base in Ngarbuh, with the stated aim of cutting off a separatist supply route from Nigeria.
On 24 May, the Nigerian Army arrested eight men in Taraba State, on the border between Nigeria and Cameroon, for smuggling fuel to Ambazonian rebels.
On 24 November, Cameroonian forces ambushed and killed at least five ADF fighters in Nchulam, Bamenda, including a commander known as "General Weapon" and his deputy, "Colonel Mami".
On 24 October 1958, the Legislative Assembly of French Cameroon solemnly proclaimed the desire of Cameroonians to see their country accede full independence on 1 January 1960.
On 24 October, the Kumba school massacre took place, with 10–12 gunmen killing 7 children and wounding another 13.
On 24 September, AGovC leader Ayaba Cho Lucas was arrested in Norway and charged with inciting crimes against humanity.
On 25 April, separatists forced the Cameroonian Army to retreat from the town of Belo.
On 25 August 2011, Eto'o announced his departure from Inter Milan via an open letter to the fans.
On 25 August, a driver for a health NGO was kidnapped and killed by gunmen in Bamenda.
On 25 February, nineteen athletes were wounded in multiple explosions during the Mount Cameroon Race of Hope.
On 25 July 2018, the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein expressed deep concern about reports of violations and abuses in the English-speaking Northwest and Southwest regions of Cameroon.
On 25 June 2015, Eto'o moved to Turkish side Antalyaspor on a three-year contract.
On 25 March, the Cameroonian military said it had killed at least seven separatist fighters in Tubah.
On 25 May, two people were killed and eleven seriously injured in an attack on a bar in Bamenda.
On 25 October, Eto'o recorded the fastest hat-trick in club history after netting three times in 23 minutes in a victory over Almería.
On 25–26 June, the BIR carried out into the villages of Banten, Mborshia, and Yere in Bui division, during which they ambushed an ADF hideout and killed between two and five fighters.
On 26 February, Cameroonian security forces detected and deactivated an improvised explosive device (IED) in Galim, West Region.
On 26 January 2019, supporters of the MRC invaded the Cameroonian embassy in Paris, citing – among other reasons – the Anglophone Crisis.
On 26 June, three civilians were killed in an IED attack in Oshum, Batibo.
On 26 March, SOCADEF declared a two-week ceasefire to give people time to get tested for COVID-19, a move that was welcomed by the United Nations.
On 26 October, Eto'o bagged a brace for Everton, heading in the opening goal and curling in a strike from outside the area, as the Toffees defeated Burnley 3−1.
On 26 October, following a public screening of a documentary on President Paul Biya organized by the ruling party, two residents were shot dead and a municipal official was abducted and murdered by unidentified gunmen in Bamenda II.
On 27 April, SDF leader John Fru Ndi was kidnapped in Kumbo by separatists, but was released the same day.
On 27 August 2012, Eto'o was in the squad to face Cape Verde in the first leg of a qualification play-off for the 2013 Africa Cup of Nations, but the striker refused to play, as a protest against what he described as the "amateurish and poorly organised" national team set-up.
On 27 August, a soldier was killed in an alleged separatist attack near Bamenda.
On 27 December, separatist fighters reportedly stabbed to death a man known as "Cho Pinyin" in Menka, Pinyin.
On 27 January 2015, Eto'o returned to the Italian Serie A, joining Sampdoria on a two-and-a-half-year deal.
On 27 July 2009, Eto'o passed his medical and signed for five years with Inter.
On 27 June, John Fru Ndi was kidnapped for the second time in two months.
On 27 June, United States Congressman Anthony Brown filed a petition with the United States Secretary of State, Rex Tillerson, to call for the government of Cameroon to immediately show concern and solve the ongoing crises.
On 27 March, Cameroonian forces carried out a series of raids against separatist hideouts in Big Babanki, Bamenda and Bambui.
On 27 October, the Constitutional Council announced that Biya was re-elected for an 8th consecutive term.
On 27 September, separatists forced the police and gendarmes to retreat from Balikumbat, Ngo-Ketunjia.
On 28 August, multiple separatist attacks occurred in at least three different localities across the Anglophone regions.
On 28 July, separatist fighters shot and wounded the deputy mayor of Oku.
On 28 March 1970, Ahidjo was re-elected as president with 100% of the vote and 99.4% turnout.
On 28 May, a student and a policeman were injured in Bamenda during an attempt by separatists to disrupt the written part of the GCE exam.
On 28 November, separatists blocked the Buea-Kumba Highway.
On 28 September, Cameroon announced that over the last four days it had expelled separatist fighters from at least a hundred schools across the Anglophone regions, with the aim of reopening schools on 5 October.
On 29 April, the "Bambalang Marine Forces" carried out a cross-border raid into Ngalim, West Region, killing four soldiers and taking off with several weapons, suffering no losses on their own.
On 29 April, three men were reportedly killed and several others injured in an alleged separatist attack in Kumba.
On 29 August 2013, Eto'o signed a one-year deal with English Premier League club Chelsea for an undisclosed fee.
On 29 December, a magistrate was kidnapped by unidentified gunmen from his home in Bamenda.
On 29 January, several people were feared dead and three vehicles were burned in a separatist attack in Buea.
On 29 March 1994, Cameroon referred the matter to the International Court of Justice (ICJ).
On 29 May, a former Red Dragon fighter who had switched sides to fight for the government was killed in a suspected planned assassination.
On 29 May, separatist forces invaded the villages of Obonyi and Kajifu in Akwaya, near the Nigerian border, reportedly with the aim of abducting selected individuals.
On 29 November 2008, he scored his 111th career Barcelona goal in all competitions in a 3–0 road win over Sevilla, moving him into the club's top ten all-time goalscorers.
On 29 November, a police officer was killed and another was injured by separatist fighters in Bamenda.
On 29 October, three suspected separatists were arrested by Cameroonian forces in a military operation in Kedjom Ketinguh, Ngo-Ketunjia.
On 3 January, separatists detonated an improvised explosive device (IED) in the town of Limbe, Southwest Region, which was set to host matches of the delayed 2021 Africa Cup of Nations (AFCON).
On 3 July, separatists ambushed a military boat carrying 13 Cameroonian soldiers on the Ekpambiri river, Manyu Division.
On 3 November 2011, he was sworn in for another term as president.
On 30 April, government soldiers killed one person and burned at least 10 houses in Kikaikelaiki, Bui.
On 30 December, a separatist fighter known as "Mission Commander" was reportedly killed by military forces in Rom, Nwa.
On 30 July, Fulani militants attacked the village of Sop in Ndu, burning several homes and killing at least one person.
On 30 June 1975, Paul Biya, a long-serving bureaucrat and administrator in the Ahidjo government, was appointed Prime Minister.
On 30 June, two separatist fighters, including an ADF commander known as "General Stone", were killed during an operation by security forces in Bamenda.
On 30 September, in anticipation of the first anniversary of Ambazonia's declaration of independence on 1 October, the authorities imposed a 48-hour curfew throughout the Anglophone region.
On 31 December, the presidents of Cameroon and Ambazonia addressed the ongoing conflict in their end of year speeches.
On 31 January 2018, after leaving Antalyaspor by mutual consent, Eto'o joined league rivals Konyaspor on a two-and-a-half-year contract.
On 31 January, a separatist militia known as the "Bui Warriors" battled Cameroonian forces in Bamkikai, Kumbo, until the Cameroonian Army withdrew from the area.
On 31 July, Cameroonian forces initiated a three-day, multi-front attack on the ADF in the Batibo district.
On 31 March, a separatist group called the Ribbons of Ambazonia announced that they had banned farming on Mondays in the Meme and Ndian divisions.
On 31 March, various Ambazonian independence movements agreed to form the Southern Cameroons Liberation Council (SCLC), a united front consisting of both separatists and federalists.
On 4 April, a severed head was discovered at the Azire Old Church Junction in Bamenda.
On 4 April, separatists imposed a 10-day lockdown on Buea.
On 4 August, separatist fighters ambushed and killed a soldier and his civilian driver in Penda Mboko, Littoral Region, the second attack there since March.
On 4 December, separatist forces started enforcing a four-day lockdown aimed at disrupting the 6 December regional election.
On 4 February, in anticipation of Youth Day on 11 February, separatists declared a 10-day lockdown, telling people all across the Anglophone regions to stay at home from 5–14 February.
On 4 July, separatist fighters killed a man and abducted his son in Ntumbaw, Ndu, Donga-Mantung.
On 4 June 2014, AlertNet reported: Almost 90,000 people have fled to neighbouring Cameroon since December and up to 2,000 a week, mostly women and children, are still crossing the border, the United Nations said.
On 4 May, former ADF spokesperson and Ambazonia People's Rights Advocacy Group President Capo Daniel called for an end of the armed struggle against Cameroon.
On 4 May, separatists carried out two ambushes with IEDs; in Akwaya, causing unknown casualties, and in Ekona.
On 4 November, a young man was killed in Mulang, Bamenda.
On 5 April, separatists attacked the University of Bamenda for defying a ghost town operation.
On 5 August 1890 the British and French concluded an agreement to clarify the boundary between French West Africa and what would become Nigeria.
On 5 December 1958, the United Nations’ General Assembly took note of the French government's declaration according to which French Cameroon would gain independence on 1 January 1960.
On 5 December, Ambazonian separatists reportedly took control of the Belegete community inside Nigeria (in Obanliku), and abducted some 30 people including traditional leader Chief Francis Ogweshi.
On 5 February 2017, and after a close match, Cameroon won the African Cup of Nations for the fifth time after defeating seven-time champions Egypt 2–1 in the final, by Vincent Aboubakar's late goal in the 89th minute of the match.
On 5 January, members of the IG were detained by Nigerian authorities, which proceeded to hand them over to Cameroon.
On 5 June, separatist fighters killed a gendarmerie commander in Njikwa.
On 5 June, suspected separatist fighters killed a councillor in an ambush in Menchum.
On 5 May 1960, Ahmadou Ahidjo became president.
On 5 May, a separatist commander known as General Sagon was killed by Cameroonian forces along with two of his collaborators in Bamunka, Ndop.
On 5 May, following appeals by the European Union Parliament, it was announced that the Anglophone Crisis would be debated at the United Nations Security Council.
On 6 April, separatists abducted alleged anti-separatists protesters in Oku, Northwest Region.
On 6 February, an official was abducted by unidentified kidnappers in Bamenda.
On 6 January, Anglophone Cameroonians in the diaspora organized protests to mark the first anniversary of the arrest of the Ambazonian leadership.
On 6 January, after failing to listen to demands from fellow separatists not to terrorize civilians, separatist commander "General Divine" was assassinated by his own men.
On 6 January, footage surfaced in which armed men claiming to be part of the Ambazonia Defence Forces (ADF) were torturing a civilian in Muyuka.
On 6 January, separatist fighters ambushed the convoy of the Senior Divisional Officer of Momo near Njikwa, using improvised explosive devices.
On 6 November, separatist fighters carried out the Egbekaw massacre, killing at least 20 civilians, injuring another 10, and setting some 15 houses on fire in the Egbekaw, near Mamfe.
On 6 October 2016, the Cameroon Anglophone Civil Society Consortium, an organization consisting of lawyer and teacher trade unions in the Anglophone regions, initiated a strike.
On 6–7 December, an explosion and gunshots were heard in Bamenda, as separatists moved to enforce a lockdown.
On 7 August, two police officers were killed and their weapon seized by separatist fighters in Bamenda.
On 7 February, four civilians were killed by Cameroonian forces in Kumbo.
On 7 July, Cameroonian forces reportedly invaded Bamali, killing two civilians and injuring others.
On 7 June, between five and nine Cameroonian gendarmes were killed and another three were wounded in a separatist attack on a checkpoint in Njitapon, Kouoptamo, West Region.
On 7 March, around 20 separatist fighters carried out attacks on a police station and gendarmerie in Galim, West Region, killing two gendarmes, two police officers and four civilians.
On 7 May, the Black Lions of Bamali seized a gendarmerie truck in Ndop.
On 7 November 2018, another Cameroonian journalist, Mimi Mefo, was arrested after reporting on social media that the Cameroonian military was behind the murder of an American missionary in the country, Charles Trumann, in October of that year.
On 7 September 2019, Eto'o announced his retirement from football.
On 8 April, responding to claims by the Cameroonian government that the war was nearing an end, separatists attacked military bases and destroyed infrastructure in villages all across the Anglophone regions.
On 8 July, a retired soldier and an internally displaced person was killed by suspected separatists in Bamenda.
On 8 July, at least two gendarmes were killed and several more were wounded in an ambush in Ndop.
On 8 June, armed men claiming to be ADF fighters set fire to a vehicle in Bamenda.
On 8 March, Eto'o opened scoring in Chelsea's 4–0 victory over Tottenham Hotspur when defender Jan Vertonghen sent a backpass straight into his path.
On 8 May, separatist fighters led by "Field Marshall Lucifer" captured and burned down a military post in Bomana, Meme.
On 8 October 2005, Cameroon drew with Egypt 1–1 while eventual World Cup debutants Ivory Coast defeated Sudan 3–1, preventing Cameroon from travelling to Germany.
On 8 October, Cameroonian forces raided a separatist stronghold in the village of Effa in Momo.
On 8 September, Cameroon announced Operation Bamenda Clean to weed out separatists from the city; the announcement was followed shortly by civilians accusing soldiers of extortion.
On 8 September, a former separatist fighter was killed in an alleged targeted attack in Bamenda.
On 9 April 1892 he reached Kukawa on the shore of the lake.
On 9 April, the AGovC formally allied itself with the Indigenous People of Biafra, led by Nnamdi Kanu.
On 9 April, the newly established SCLC declared an early end to lockdown, citing how it mainly affected civilians.
On 9 August, two police officers were killed in a bomb explosion in Bamenda.
On 9 January, Cameroonian forces raided a separatist hideout in Ewai.
On 9 November 2020, Eto'o was involved in a car accident, when his 4×4 had a head-on collision with a bus.
On 9 October, the Minister of Territorial Administration Paul Atanga Nji banned media outlets in the country from discussing the president's health.
On 9 October, two Cameroonian soldiers were killed in a separatist ambush in Mbingo, Boyo department.
On 9 September, the ADF carried out its first military action, attacking a military base in Besongabang, Manyu.
On 9–11 March, a separatist commander known as Barack was killed by the Rapid Intervention Brigade during clashes near Batibo.
On April 6, 1984, supporters of Ahidjo attempted a coup d'état, led by the Republican Guard, an elite force recruited by Ahidjo, mainly from the north.
On August 15, 1984, Lake Monoun exploded in a limnic eruption that released enormous amounts of carbon dioxide, suffocating 37 people to death.
On August 21, 1986, another limnic eruption at Lake Nyos killed as many as 1,800 people and 3,500 livestock.
On July 5, 1884, German explorer and administrator Gustav Nachtigal began signing agreements with Duala leaders establishing a German protectorate in the region.
On November 4, 1982, Ahidjo resigned as president and Biya was his legal successor.
On his first press-conference in Milan, he declared that he was where he wanted to be and refused to compare himself to Ibrahimović saying, "I'm Samuel Eto'o and I don't want to compare myself to anyone.
On occasion, a Fon may permit members of the community to perform in an elephant mask along with a leopard skin, indicating a statement of wealth, status, and power being associated with this masquerade.
On the last two days of November, five soldiers and five policemen were killed in two separate separatist attacks near Mamfe.
On the other hand, the Germans and French looked at Fons with contempt and were often suspicious of them.
Once a significant portion of the population of Southern Cameroons clearly wanted separation, the separatists would approach the international community with their cause.
One Cameroonian soldier and three separatists were killed in Buea on 14 July, and at least one Cameroonian soldier and at least five separatists were killed in Mbiame three days later.
One Cameroonian soldier was killed during the same incident, and the operation was described as "bloody", although the other separatist fighters at the base were reported to have escaped.
One anonymous hostage said that they had been maltreated.
One can also notice the appearance of certain writings that break with the academic style.
One month later, they defeated Togo in Yaoundé by three goals.
One more civilian was injured.
One of the oldest domesticated Pearl millet in West Africa was found in the Chad Basin, charred together with wild grasses, and their era can be traced back to 800–1000 cal BC.
One of them being that separatists invited to the conversation were either in prison or were scared of being arrested by the government.
One person later died in captivity.
Only 6.6% of the roadways are tarred.
Only two games later, on 8 November 2008, Eto'o scored four goals in the first half of Barcelona's game against Real Valladolid, which ended 6–0.
Opposition party leader Edna Njilin of the Cameroon People's Party spoke out against the enforced use of French in the classroom.
Opposition politicians and Western governments have alleged voting irregularities and fraud on each of these occasions.
Opposition to German rule followed the annexation.
Oral literature (or orature, the term coined by Ugandan scholar Pio Zirimu) may be in prose or verse.
Oral tradition collected by Alexis Maxime Feyou de Happy and his son, Joseph, suggested that the arrival of the Bamiléké in Western Cameroon occurred in multiple waves with two primary routes.
Oral traditions proclaim that the Fon may transform into either an elephant or leopard whenever he chooses.
Originally, Cameroon was the exonym given by the Portuguese to the Wouri River, which they called Rio dos Camarões meaning 'river of shrimps' or 'shrimp river', referring to the then abundant Cameroon ghost shrimp.
Other African Nobel laureates in literature are Naguib Mahfouz (Egypt) in 1988, Nadine Gordimer (South Africa) in 1991, J.
Other crafts include basket weaving, beadworking, brass and bronze working, calabash carving and painting, embroidery, and leather working.
Other herbivores include red river hog (Potamochoerus porcus), bushbuck (Tragelaphus scriptus), bay duiker (Cephalophus dorsalis), blue duiker (Philantomba monticola), and yellow-backed duiker (Cephalophus sylvicultor).
Other parties that had either Duala founders or significant backing include the Bloc Démocratique Camerounais (BDC), and Action Nationale (AN).
Other popular genres include Bend-skin, mangambeu, and makassi.
Other secret societies include the Ekongolo, Jengu, Losango, and Munji.
Other separatist groups had attacked civilians 25 times within the same time frame, and were responsible for 13 civilian deaths.
Other sources claimed that neither side was winning, and that internal discontent was forcing Cameroon towards a ceasefire.
Other themes in this period include social problems such as corruption, the economic disparities in newly independent countries, and the rights and roles of women.
Other works in written form are abundant, namely in North Africa, the Sahel regions of west Africa, and on the Swahili coast.
Others described the separatists as severely outgunned and on the verge of defeat, mostly due to their lack of access to proper weapons.
Others include Ewondo, Bassa, Bamileke, Duala and Arabic in the North and Far-North regions.
Our men aren't familiar with the forest." Cameroonian authorities have admitted that they have little control over the security situation outside the cities.
Outline of Cameroon Telephone numbers in Cameroon Cameroon.
Outside of Africa, Dibango and makossa were only briefly popular, but the genre has produced several pan-African superstars through the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s.
Outside the major cities, facilities are often dirty and poorly equipped.
Over 60% of the population is under age 25.
Over the course of the 2010s, the internationally unrecognized secessionist state called Ambazonia gained increasing momentum in its home regions, resulting in the ongoing Anglophone Crisis in Cameroon.
Over the following few centuries, European interests regularised trade with the coastal peoples, and Christian missionaries pushed inland.
Over the next twenty years a large part of the Chad Basin was incorporated by treaty or by force into French West Africa.
Over the weekend 23–25 May, more than 25 Cameroonian soldiers were killed and more than 12 military vehicles were damaged in Kumbo, Bui.
Overall, female writers are today far better represented in African literature than they were before independence.
Overall, he scored 41 goals in 103 appearances for the Montpellier.
Owing to the obscure nature of many of the separatist militias, some attacks attributed to separatists may as well be the acts of local criminals.
Parfait-Louis Monteil was given charge of an expedition to discover where this line actually ran.
Paris: Institut d'ethnologie Musée de l'homme.
Paris: Les Éditions Wala.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) DeLancey, Mark W.; DeLancey, Mark Dike (2000).
Part of the Chad Basin is located within the Chad Basin National Park in Nigeria, and the country and Cameroon have established the Lake Chad Ramsar Wetland with a total area of 8,225 km2 (3,176 sq mi).
Partly through the influence of colonialism, there is a national culture, and two distinct regional cultures: the Anglophone and Francophone regions, which primarily speak English and French and use different legal systems.
Party leader Kah Walla has said that the crisis can be solved by turning Cameroon into a federation.
Paul Barthélemy Biya (né Biya'a bi Mvondo, born 13 February 1933) is a Cameroonian politician who has been serving as the second president of Cameroon since 1982.
Paul Biya married Chantal Vigouroux, who is 36 years his junior, on 23 April 1994, and has two more children with her: Paul Jr and Brenda Biya.
People from the North-West and South-West provinces, which used to be a part of British Cameroons, have the highest proportion of Protestants.
People from the overpopulated western highlands and the underdeveloped north are moving to the coastal plantation zone and urban centres for employment.
People over 65 years of age account for only 3.11% of the total population.
People speaking Bantu languages refer to their languages by ethnic endonyms, which did not have an indigenous concept prior to European contact for the larger ethnolinguistic phylum named by 19th-century European linguists.
People were forbidden from moving across sub-division boundaries, and gatherings of four or more people in public were prohibited.
People were killed and hundreds were jailed as a result of these protests.
People widely believe in witchcraft, and the government outlaws such practices.
Pep Guardiola was appointed as Barcelona's new manager for the 2008–09 season.
Performers such as Manu Dibango, Francis Bebey, Moni Bilé, and Petit-Pays popularised the style worldwide in the 1970s and 1980s.
Permanent villages were established to the south of the lake by 500 BC, and major archaeological discoveries include the Sao civilization.
Petrographic studies of the 1999 and 2000 eruptions show that the lavas are basanites containing roughly 20–25 % phenocrysts of euhedral to sub‑hedral olivine, clinopyroxene and plagioclase.
Petroleum exploitation has fallen since 1986, but this is still a substantial sector such that dips in prices have a strong effect on the economy.
Philippe Leclerc de Hauteclocque established a state of siege throughout the country and abolished almost all public freedom.
Pirogue racing has traditionally been the most important sport among the Duala.
Planning in Contemporary Africa.
Plants such as hyparrhenia rufa grow on the shores of lakes with long floods in the south.
Plateau Joss is the name used historically for the current district of Akwa.
Please thank you sorry excuse me you are welcome.
Plurality is indicated by a change of class, with a resulting change of prefix.
Pluralizing to 'children' gives Vitoto vidogo vimekisoma (Vana vadoko varikuverenga in Shona), and pluralizing to 'books' (vitabu) gives vitoto vidogo vimevisoma.
Poetry describes a narrative poem based on a short, ribald anecdote.
Polygamy (more specifically, polygyny) is practiced, and some important individuals may have literally hundreds of wives.
Popular music styles include ambasse bey of the coast, assiko of the Bassa, mangambeu of the Bangangte, and tsamassi of the Bamileke.
Popular singers have used the hybrid language and added to its popularity.
Population density is highest in the large urban centres, the western highlands, and the northeastern plain.
Portuguese explorers reached the coast in the 15th century.
Portuguese sailors reached the coast in 1472.
Post-colonial literature has become increasingly diverse, with some writers returning to their native languages.
Post-independence in 1960, a local variant on palm wine music called assiko, was popular especially Jean Bikoko and Dikoume Bernard.
Praise singers, bards sometimes known as "griots", tell their stories with music.
Precolonial African literature also included extensive manuscript traditions, particularly in regions connected to Islamic scholarly networks.
President Biya has engaged in a decades-long clash with the government of Nigeria over possession of the oil-rich Bakassi peninsula.
President Biya's Cameroon People's Democratic Movement (CPDM) was the only legal political party until December 1990.
President Paul Biya of Cameroon promised to "neutralize" all separatists who refused to disarm, while emphasizing that anyone who drops their guns can be reintegrated into society.
Pressure from Anglophone groups in former British Cameroons resulted in changes to the constitution in 1996, which purported to decentralize power but fell short of Anglophone demands to reestablish the federal structure.
Pressure from the UN and international community and the threat of withdrawal of foreign aid ultimately forced Nigeria to acquiesce and in 2006 the Greentree Agreement laid out a plan for the transfer of administration over two years.
Previously, Algerian-born Albert Camus had been awarded the prize in 1957.
Prince Lock Priso still favored the British and staged a rebellion in December 1884.
Prisons are overcrowded with little access to adequate food and medical facilities, and prisons run by traditional rulers in the north are charged with holding political opponents at the behest of the government.
Pro-independence groups claimed that this violated the constitution, as the majority of deputies from West Cameroon had not consented to legitimize the constitutional changes.
Production of Fairtrade cotton was initiated in Cameroon in 2004.
Prominent musicians from this period included Moni Bilé, Douleur, Bébé Manga, Ben Decca, Petit-Pays, and Esa.
Protesters were attacked with tear gas, and protesters and lawyers were allegedly assaulted by soldiers.
Protestors complained that Anglophone regions in Cameroon (the Northwest Region and the Southwest Region) were neglected by Biya's government, and excluded from power.
Published in 1958, late in the colonial era, Things Fall Apart analysed the effects of colonialism on traditional African society.
Puma argued that a two-piece kit is not stated as a requirement in the FIFA laws of the game.
Puma had designed a one-piece kit for the Cameroon team which FIFA declared illegal, stating that the kits must have separate shirts and shorts.
Puma, however, lost the case in court, and Cameroon were forced to wear two-piece kits, but FIFA subsequently restored the six qualifying points to Cameroon.
Radiometric dating of volcanoes along the Cameroon Volcanic Line shows ages ranging from about 51.8 million years to the present.
Rail service runs from Kumba in the west to Bélabo in the east and north to Ngaoundéré.
Rangeley, Robert; Thiam, Bocar M.; Anderson, Randolph A.; Lyle, Colin A.
Rapids and waterfalls obstruct the southern rivers, but these sites offer opportunities for hydroelectric development and supply most of Cameroon's energy.
Rather than spend all of the inheritance maintaining unproductive family members, the heir could, in the contemporary period, utilize his resources in more financially productive ways such as for savings and investment.
Rather than write or sing for beauty in itself, African writers, taking their cue from oral literature, use beauty to help communicate important truths and information to society.
Real Madrid B were relegated to the third tier, Segunda División B, where non-EU players are not allowed, and as a result, he was loaned to second division Leganés for the 1997–98 season.
Real per capita GDP fell by more than 60% from 1986 to 1994.
Realising that the Duala would never again follow the rule of a single king, the Germans instead played the competitors against one another.
Recent data shows that about thirty percent of the population lives in poverty (Avameg, Inc).
Recent research in southern Cameroon indicates that the Iron Age may have started there as early as 1000 BCE and was certainly well established by 100 BCE at the latest.
Recent signs, however, are encouraging.
Reduplication is a common morphological phenomenon in Bantu languages and is usually used to indicate frequency or intensity of the action signalled by the (unreduplicated) verb stem.
Reeds mainly grow in the north where the salinity is high, and the floating plant pistia sometimes covers large areas of open water.
Referee Fernando Carmona Méndez, however, made no mention of the incidents in his match report, commenting only that the behavior of the crowd was "normal"; two of the abusers were caught and given five-month sporting-event bans after being identified to police by other spectators.
Regional and continental destinations include Abidjan, Brazzaville, Dakar, Johannesburg, Kinshasa, Lagos, Malabo, and Nairobi.
Religious differences often correspond to colonial or other historical influence.
Research conducted under the European Research Council-funded project Islam in the Horn of Africa documented more than 4,500 previously unrecorded manuscript texts produced in Arabic and local African languages across the Horn of Africa (Ethiopia, Eritrea, Djibouti, Somalia, Somaliland).
Research in African Literatures.
Road banditry has long hampered transport along the eastern and western borders, and since 2005, the problem has intensified in the east as the Central African Republic has further destabilised.
Roadblocks often serve little other purpose than to allow police and gendarmes to collect bribes from travellers.
Roads and other infrastructure projects were undertaken with native labor, often in extremely harsh conditions.
Roger Milla himself said that he had finished high school but his claim has been refuted by some Cameroonian writers.
Roofs are usually made of metal sheeting.
Rumors have it that she and several people close to her did not die of natural causes.
SCACUF would later transform itself into the Interim Government of Ambazonia (IG).
SCNC activities were routinely disrupted by police.
Sako also said that the separatists were purchasing more weapons and that the fight would continue.
Samuel Eto'o Fils (French pronunciation: [samɥɛl eto fis]; born 10 March 1981) is a Cameroonian football administrator and former player who is the current president of the Cameroonian Football Federation.
Samuel Ikome Sako was announced as Acting President on 4 February, replacing Tabe for the time being.
Samuel is truly extraordinary." On 29 May, Eto'o scored two goals in the final of the Coppa Italia against Palermo to help Inter win 3–1 and taking his total season goals to 37, a new record high for him.
Sao artifacts show that they were skilled workers in bronze, copper, and iron.
Sarah Etonge has won the race seven times and is also a tour operator.
Satellite images show extensive damage to villages.
Satellite states of Bornu included the Damagaram in the west and Baguirmi to the southeast of Lake Chad.
School attendance in Cameroon is also affected by child labour.
Scores and results list Cameroon's goal tally first, score column indicates score after each Milla goal.
Second, this practice of individual responsibility in contrast to a system of strong family obligations prevented a drain on individual financial resources.
Secular poetry may concern celebrations such as births and weddings, or accounts of heroic warriors.
Security forces pursued the attackers, and an ensuing shootout left two suspected separatists dead.
Seismic activity intensifies before eruptions and can involve deep swarms between 20 and 55 km (12 and 34 mi).
Sentences of life imprisonment, hard labor or death were numerous, and executions were often public.
Separatist activist Capo Daniel confirmed the abduction, stating that the women were being punished for "allowing Cameroon's administration to manipulate them".
Separatist fighters attacked Mbessa, Boyo, killing one villager, kidnapping and wounding others.
Separatist fighters killed a soldier in Mundemba.
Separatist fighters set fire to a bulldozer working on the Tugi-Bamenda road.
Separatist fighters who had vowed to disrupt 2021 Africa Cup of Nations in the city said on social media they were responsible for the blast and stated that it was "a warning sign of what they will do during AFCON".
Separatist forces started the new year by declaring a five-day lockdown for February, intended to prevent the upcoming parliamentary election from taking place in the Anglophone regions.
Separatist leaders who were extradited from Nigeria in 2018 were in 2019 handed life sentences by a military tribunal.
Separatist losses were estimated to be in the hundreds.
Separatist militias in Northwest Region suffered heavy losses during operations in June, and a source in the Cameroonian military claimed that Cameroon was close to winning the war.
Separatists began opening their own schools in September 2019, but these were insufficient to cover the educational needs in the areas they controlled.
Separatists burned a taxi at a former hospital in Bamenda.
Separatists burned three bikes in Ngie, Momo.
Separatists claimed that Oliver had been killed by an insider during separatist infighting; his assassin had revealed the location of the body to Cameroonian forces.
Separatists claimed to have abducted nine or more people who had watched the celebrations on TV.
Separatists condemned the blockade and denied having anything to do with it.
Separatists had already announced a lockdown from 19 to 21 May, and fighters patrolled public places during the holiday to enforce the lockdown.
Separatists have also been accused of using schools and churches as military barracks; in July 2019, Cameroon accused the separatists of occupying more than 50 schools.
Separatists have occasionally carried out raids into the neighboring Francophone regions of Littoral and West.
Separatists held large parades in rural areas.
Separatists killed a police officer on 1 September, Police forces responded by destroying shops and shooting indiscriminately, forcing people to stay indoors.
Separatists killed two gendarmes in Bamenda in the first week of the month.
Separatists set ablaze an unspecified number of houses who reportedly belongs to the Mbororos people in Ndu, Northwest Region.
September saw heavy escalation in Bamenda.
September saw some setbacks for the separatists, as the government launched attacks into the rural areas they controlled.
Seven of the dead were from West Region.
Several UPC militias were formed though their access to weapons was very limited.
Several billion dollars are thus diverted to the benefit of oil companies and regime officials.
Several dozen anti-UPC figures were murdered or kidnapped, bridges, telephone lines, and other infrastructure were sabotaged.
Several months into the war, the IG would reject the idea of an armed struggle, preferring instead a diplomatic campaign and civil disobedience.
She later stated that she hoped the post would change anti-LGBT laws in Cameroon.
She reportedly accused Valença of sharing the photographs "for the attention of social media followers and even extort money" on TikTok.
Shortly after independence, filmmakers such as Jean-Paul Ngassa and Thérèse Sita-Bella explored similar themes.
Shortly after the outbreak of World War I in 1914, the British invaded Cameroon from Nigeria and the French from French Equatorial Africa in the Kamerun campaign.
Shortly afterwards, French Cameroun's political leadership changed the constitution again, appointed French-speaking Paul Biya as Prime Minister and successor to Ahmadou Ahidjo.
Shortly afterwards, a mine killed four policemen and wounded another six, convincing many that the separatists were no longer outgunned, but indeed well-armed.
Short‑lived explosive outbursts occurred in 1989 and 2012 without lava emission, illustrating the complex behaviour of the magma plumbing system.
Shufai had been transferred to the hospital following 10 days of deteriorating health, and was unconscious when he arrived.
Siblings who did not share in the inheritance were, therefore, strongly encouraged to make it on their own through individual initiative and by assuming responsibility for earning their livelihood.
Similar cultural practices stemming from common origins as largely Nilo-Saharan or Bantu peoples are also evident in Central Africa including in music, dance, art, body adornment, initiation, and marriage rituals.
Similar effects are seen in loanwords for other non-African CV languages like Japanese.
Similarly, the Anglican Church of the Province of Central Africa covers dioceses in Botswana, Malawi, Zambia, and Zimbabwe, while the Church of Central Africa, Presbyterian has synods in Malawi, Zambia, and Zimbabwe.
Simplified phylogeny of northwestern branches of Bantu by Grollemund (2012): Other computational phylogenetic analyses of Bantu include Currie et al.
Since 1888, terracotta bricks have been produced in Douala.
Since 1970, five countries in the southern part of the basin have constructed numerous water conservancy projects in the upper reaches of the Chari River, Logone River, and Yobe River to intercept river water, resulting in a sharp decrease in the amount of water entering the lake.
Since 2004 the bridge has been undergoing a major rehabilitation.
Since 2016, more than 450,000 people have fled their homes.
Since December 2020, Human Rights Watch claimed that Islamist armed group Boko Haram has stepped up attacks and killed at least 80 civilians in towns and villages in the Far North region of Cameroon.
Since November 2016, protesters from the predominantly English-speaking Northwest and Southwest regions of the country have been campaigning for continued use of the English language in schools and courts.
Since most of the individuals had submitted asylum claims, the deportation immediately became controversial, as it possibly violated the Nigerian constitution.
Since the 1980s, one-third of the water in the Chari River and the Logone River has been diverted and intercepted by the Central African Republic located upstream for agricultural irrigation and hydroelectric power generation.
Since the drought in the 1970s, the soil that can be planted without irrigation and fertilization has been exposed at the bottom of the lake, and it has been reclaimed as a polder for planting maize, cowpea, rice, sorghum and other crops.
Since the early 1990s, he has faced his strongest opposition from the Anglophone population of the former Southern Cameroons in the western part of the country.
Since the late 1980s, Cameroon has been following programmes advocated by the World Bank and International Monetary Fund (IMF) to reduce poverty, privatise industries, and increase economic growth.
Since then, the area of Lake Chad has entered a relatively stable stage with a slight increase.
Sisiku Julius Ayuk Tabe and Ayaba Cho Lucas both opposed them, and the Cameroonian Government did not buy into the talks either, rendering them ineffective.
Six of those countries (Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, and Republic of the Congo) are also members of the Economic and Monetary Community of Central Africa (CEMAC) and share a common currency, the Central African CFA franc.
Slash-and-burn agriculture is a common practice.
Slave owners could only trade their slaves to other Duala, however, and owners were responsible for paying their slaves' debts and arranging their marriages.
Slave trading increased with Afonso's wars of conquest.
Slavery wreaked havoc in the interior, with states initiating wars of conquest for captives.
Slaves from raids in the south were their principal trade good along with mined salt.
Smaller Muslim communities exist in the other countries too.
Smaller movements are occurring as workers seek employment in lumber mills and plantations in the south and east.
Smaller opposition parties, such as the Cameroon Renaissance Movement (MRC), also blame the government for failing to solve the Anglophone Crisis.
Snacks are popular, especially in larger towns where they may be bought from street vendors.
So, in the country of Botswana the people are the Batswana, one person is a Motswana, and the language is Setswana; and in Uganda, centred on the kingdom of Buganda, the dominant ethnicity are the Baganda (singular Muganda), whose language is Luganda.
Soils and climate on the coast encourage extensive commercial cultivation of bananas, cocoa, oil palms, rubber, and tea.
Solomon Tandeng Muna became vice president.
Some 13 hostages were freed from the separatist camp, which was subsequently destroyed.
Some 5,000 Gyele and Baka Pygmy peoples roam the southeastern and coastal rainforests or live in small, roadside settlements.
Some Bamileke groups also recognize sub-chiefs, or fonte.
Some of the Bamileke who speak Grassfields languages clustered closely with Narrow Bantu speakers.
Some of the languages are spoken by a very small number of people; for example, the Kabwa language was estimated in 2007 to be spoken by only 8,500 people, but was assessed to be a distinct language.
Some of the neighbourhoods of Douala include Akwa.
Some of them help out voluntarily so they will not lose their skills.
Some of them were severely beaten and many of them were arrested during the protests.
Some of these orchestras, such as Richard Band de Zoetele, became quite popular in spite of scorn from the European elite.
Some other sources estimate the Bantu Expansion started closer to 3000 BC.
Some performers sing complete songs alone, accompanied by a harplike instrument.
Some separatists consider schools to be legitimate targets because the French language is taught as a mandatory subject.
Some words from various Bantu languages have been borrowed into western languages.
Sources testify those sent to fight the secessionist militia are French-speaking, thus widening the linguistic division between local residents.
Southern Cameroon is inhabited by speakers of Bantu and Semi-Bantu languages.
Southern Cameroons federated with Cameroon on 1 October 1961 as "West Cameroon", with its own prime minister.
Southern Cameroons lost its autonomous status and became the Northwest Region and the Southwest Region of the Republic of Cameroon.
Southern Cameroons was administered as a province of Eastern Nigeria.
Southern ethnic groups predominantly follow Christian or traditional African animist beliefs or a syncretic combination of the two.
Sport in Cameroon is dominated by football.
Staple crops include cocoyams, groundnuts and maize.
Starting as a low-scale insurgency, the conflict spread to most parts of the Anglophone regions within a year.
Storytellers in Africa sometimes use call-and-response techniques to tell their stories.
Strawberry, Ruben Boumtje-Boumtje, Christian Koloko, and Luc Mbah a Moute.
Students in Cameroon were granted 11 month visas to travel to Israel and learn about agriculture, while poultry farmers underwent training for poultry production in Israel.
Stuttgart: Karl Kramer Verlag.
Sub-alpine grassland is found at the highest elevations, from 3,000 metres (9,800 ft) to over 4,000 metres (13,000 ft).
Such findings highlight the scale and diversity of written literary production in precolonial Africa alongside well-documented oral traditions.
Suites architecturales: Kinshasa, Douala, Dakar.
Sung by women, bikutsi featured sexually explicit lyrics and songs about everyday problems.
Sur le passé de l'Afrique Noire.
Suspected witches are often subject to mob violence.
Swahili literature, similarly, draws inspiration from Islamic teachings but developed under indigenous circumstances, one of the most renowned and earliest pieces of Swahili literature being Utendi wa Tambuka or "The Story of Tambuka" (dated 1728).
São Tomé and Príncipe also gained independence in 1975 in the aftermath of the Carnation Revolution.
Table of contents Shamim, Amna.
Taking steps to stop the separatists from producing their own weapons, the authorities banned the sale of machetes and iron rods in the Anglophone regions.
Talks mediated by Switzerland in 2019 ultimately failed, and the Ambazonian leadership crisis has complicated any diplomatic process.
Tanang, Patrice; Mimche, Honoré; Efon, Hervé (2014).
Technology and artificial intelligence can help develop Cameroon.
That is, sk- has been broken up by inserting an epenthetic -u-; -u has also been added at the end of the word.
That was followed by another 1–0 win against Ivory Coast, and a comfortable 3–0 win against Togo.
The "niki" changes the color of the palm oil to yellow, which is the reason why achu soup is also known as yellow soup.
The 1980s also saw rapid development of Cameroon's media which saw a flourishing of both makossa and bikutsi.
The 1992 Labour Code of Cameroon gives workers the freedom to belong to a trade union or not to belong to any trade union at all.
The 1994 World Cup in the United States saw the adjustment of representation for African teams qualifying, from two to three.
The 1996 constitution establishes a second house of parliament, the 100-seat Senate.
The 1998 World Cup in France saw an increase of 24 to 32 teams, with Cameroon one of the five countries representing Africa.
The 1999 eruption (28 March–22 April) and the 2000 eruption (28 May–19 June) produced basanite lavas following the NE–SW fracture system and created more than 100 cones and vents.
The 2004 African Cup of Nations witnessed Cameroon again run into controversy regarding their kits.
The 2012 edition of the Atlas linguistique du Cameroun (ALCAM) provides the following classification of the Niger–Congo languages of Cameroon.
The 38-year-old Milla emerged as one of the tournament's major stars.
The AAC was renamed the Southern Cameroons Peoples Conference (SCPC), and later the Southern Cameroons Peoples Organisation (SCAPO), with the Southern Cameroons National Council (SCNC) as the executive governing body.
The ADF allied itself with the Indigenous People of Biafra and its armed wing, the Eastern Security Network in 2021, and declared that this alliance would entail joint military operations.
The ADF alone had clashed with the army 83 times, separatist militias were now active in 12 divisions, and attacks were now more lethal.
The ADF also alleged that the Cameroonian Army had abused civilians during their search for the senator.
The ADF claimed responsibility for the attack.
The ADF claimed responsibility.
The ADF claimed that two Cameroonian soldiers were also killed.
The ADF confirmed the death of eleven of their men, and said that they had cancelled an offensive in Bamenda involving 300 fighters due to the losses.
The ADF denied suffering any casualties, and said that the fighters had released the hostages in order to escape in time.
The ADF offered to train IPOB militants at camps in Ambazonian-controlled territory.
The AGovC announced that the airline in question often transported soldiers, and that they thus considered their aircraft to be legitimate targets.
The AGovC-IPOB alliance was denounced by the Interim Government of Ambazonia as well as by other Biafran separatist groups.
The Adamawa Plateau (French: Massif de l'Adamaoua) is a plateau region in west-central Africa stretching from south-eastern Nigeria through north-central Cameroon (Adamawa and North Provinces) to the Central African Republic.
The Adamawa Plateau broadly bisects these into northern and southern divisions.
The Adamawa Plateau is a highland region in central Cameroon.
The Adamawa Plateau is the source of many waterways, including the Benue River.
The African Development Bank, on the other hand, defines Central Africa as seven countries: Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Republic of the Congo, Democratic Republic of Congo, Equatorial Guinea, and Gabon.
The African works best known in the West from the periods of colonization and the slave trade are primarily slave narratives, such as Olaudah Equiano's The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano (1789).
The Ambazonia Defence Forces (ADF) announced that the separatists had expanded their territorial grip and that the war would continue.
The Ambazonia Defence Forces (ADF) claimed responsibility, saying that their primary target had been Cameroonian elite forces.
The Ambazonia Self-Defence Council claimed that they not only had nothing to do with the kidnappings, but had also sent its own fighters to try to locate the children.
The Ambazonia State Army claimed responsibility.
The Ambazonian forces have also engaged in widespread extortion of the civilian population in the Anglophone regions.
The Ambazonian separatists are fighting a guerrilla war.
The Ambazonians responded by killing the chief, whose corpse was discovered three days later.
The Ambazonians, who claimed that 98 percent of the population boycotted the election, hailed this as a great victory.
The Anglophone Crisis (French: Crise anglophone), also known as the Ambazonia War, is an ongoing armed conflict in the English-speaking Northwest and Southwest regions of Cameroon, between the Cameroonian government and Ambazonian separatist groups, part of the long-standing Anglophone problem.
The Anglophone Crisis has become a diplomatic challenge to Cameroon, and has damaged the country's relations with some of its allies.
The Anglophone Crisis has become a divisive question in Cameroonian politics.
The Anglophone protests in late 2016 were led by English-speaking lawyers in protest against the use of French in Cameroonian courts, which led to violent clashes with police.
The Atlantic multidecadal oscillation and the El Niño–Southern Oscillation have affected precipitation in the Sahel region.
The Atlas linguistique du Cameroun (ALCAM, or "Linguistic Atlas of Cameroon") lists about 250 languages in Cameroon.
The BIR is a special force body that reports directly to President Biya.
The BNL threatened to respond unless Ambazonian leaders condemned the invasion.
The Bamenda highlands in western Cameroon near the border with Nigeria are one of the most likely origin for the Bantu peoples, whose language and culture came to dominate most of central and southern Africa between 1000 BCE and 1000 CE.
The Bamileke also believe that the Ancestor's spirit still remains within the actual skulls of the Ancestors as well, so they keep possession of them.
The Bamileke are known for elaborate elephant masks used in dance ceremonies or funerals to show the importance of the deceased person.
The Bamileke languages are Grassfields languages that belong to the Southern Bantoid branch of the Niger-Congo language family.
The Bamileke people are known for their entrepreneurial spirit.
The Bamileke people developed their own musical style, Tsamassi, which was popularised by André-Marie Tala.
The Bamileke trace their ancestry, inheritance and succession through the male line, and children belong to the fondom of their father.
The Bamiléké people are an ethnic group of Central Africa that inhabits the Western High Plateau colloquially known as the grassfields of Cameroon.
The Bamum ethnic group of the West Region is largely Muslim.
The Bantu languages (English: UK: , US: Proto-Bantu: *bantʊ̀) are a language family, or a branch of the proposed Niger-Congo language family, containing about 600 languages that are spoken by the Bantu peoples of Central, Southern, Eastern and Southeast Africa.
The Batanga of the region of Kribi could be added to the preceding list as they claim they are descendants of Mbedi and they report some degree of mutual comprehension between their own language and Malimba.
The Battle of Batibo was fought on 3 March, producing unprecedented casualties on both sides and forcing over 4,000 locals to flee.
The Bells gained land in Bali district, and the French promised not to take any of the Akwa or Deido clans' holdings.
The Bells initially refused, but the Great Depression eventually prompted them to accept the French compromise.
The Beti people include the Ewondo, Bulu and Fang ethnic groups.
The Beti, or Ewondo, live in the area around Yaoundé and south into Equatorial Guinea.
The Bonakouamouang Chimney also dates back to this period.
The Bornu Empire declined in the 18th century, and later lost its western region to the Sokoto Caliphate during the early 19th century.
The British administered the territories through indirect rule, allowing native authorities to administer the population according to their own traditions.
The British administered their territory from neighbouring Nigeria.
The British agreed, and Southern Cameroons became an autonomous region with its capital still at Buea.
The British also encouraged German investment in the Tanganyika Territory.
The British also wanted to mould the Duala to their own concepts of civilization.
The British arrived too late and on 28 March 1885 ceded Victoria to Germany.
The British mandate was an elongated strip of land along the border of Colonial Nigeria, consisting of Northern Cameroons and Southern Cameroons, including the historical Ambas Bay Protectorate.
The British territory was administered as two areas, Northern Cameroons and Southern Cameroons.
The Bui Warriors claimed to have killed at least five soldiers with the IED attacks alone.
The Bushong language recorded by Vansina, however, has final consonants, while slurring of the final syllable (though written) is reported as common among the Tonga of Malawi.
The CFA franc – the common currency of Cameroon and 13 other African states – was devalued by 50% in January 1994.
The CPDM supported both the carrying out and conclusion of the Major National Dialogue, which was organized by the Cameroonian government.
The Caine Prize for African Writing, an award for short stories, was established in 2000.
The Cameroon Armed Forces (French: Forces armées camerounaises, FAC) consists of the country's army (Armée de Terre), the country's navy (Marine Nationale de la République (MNR), including naval infantry), the Cameroonian Air Force (Armée de l'Air du Cameroun, AAC), and the Gendarmerie.
The Cameroon Armed Forces announced that it had deployed scores of troops to Oku, Kumbo and Jakiri, Northwest Region, and claimed to have killed 11 separatists.
The Cameroon Federal Republic.
The Cameroon People's Democratic Movement (CPDM), the ruling party, regards the separatists as terrorists and supports a military solution to the conflict.
The Cameroon People's Party has taken a nuanced approach, condemning both the government and the separatists.
The Cameroon coast was a major hub for the purchase of slaves who were taken across the Atlantic to Brazil, the United States, and the Caribbean.
The Cameroon coast was of interest to both the British, already established in what is now Nigeria and with missionaries outposts in several towns, and the Germans who had extensive trading relationships and plantations established in the Douala region.
The Cameroon national football team (French: Équipe du Cameroun de football), also known as the Indomitable Lions (French: les lions indomptables), represents Cameroon in men's international football.
The Cameroon national football team's tradition color is green shirts, red shorts and yellow socks, colors of the national flag.
The Cameroonian Army also announced the killing of Lekeaka Oliver, Field Marshall of the Red Dragon militia, in Lebialem; the killing was denied by the IG, and was also denied by sources within the Cameroonian Army.
The Cameroonian Army claimed at least 28 separatists were killed during the battles, while the ADF claimed that 24 Cameroonian soldiers were killed.
The Cameroonian Army declared that they knew which base the attackers had come from, and that an operation would be launched to destroy it.
The Cameroonian Army enjoyed some success in weeding out separatist camps.
The Cameroonian Army is fighting a counter-insurgency war, aiming to hit the separatists' support base.
The Cameroonian Army moved into Manyu, retaking two villages on 7 December and securing Mamfe by 15 December, partly with elite troops.
The Cameroonian Army moved into the regions in force to fight the separatists and quell the demonstrations.
The Cameroonian Army said that eleven of its forces were injured during the operation, while the ADF claimed to have killed "at least two dozen" soldiers.
The Cameroonian Army said that two dozen separatists had been killed, while acknowledging the loss of several military vehicles.
The Cameroonian diaspora is spread across Europe, America and other parts of Africa.
The Cameroonian government deployed security forces to crack down the protests.
The Cameroonian government has tried to limit the extent of which the conflict affects everyday life in Southern Cameroons, and portrays the war as a battle between chaos and stability in which the government represents the latter.
The Cameroonian government was supported by the Buhari administration in Nigeria, while at least one Ambazonian group is allied to Biafran separatists.
The Cameroonian military also reinforced the Nigerian border, and on 9 October, it claimed to have stopped "hundreds of Nigerian fighters" from crossing into Cameroon.
The Cameroonian military said that several civilians were killed or abducted, while some military vehicles were also destroyed.
The Central African Republic joined in 1996, and Libya joined in 2008.
The Chad Basin covers an area of about 1×10^6 km2 (390,000 sq mi), and is injected by the Chari, Logone, and Yobe Rivers.
The Chad Basin includes Chad, Nigeria, Cameroon, Niger, Sudan, and the Central African Republic.
The Chad Basin was formed by the depression of the African Shield.
The Congo River basin has historically been ecologically significant to the populations of Central Africa, serving as an important supra-regional organization in Central Africa.
The Council of Ministers, also known as the Council of Notables, is called Kamveu.
The December offensive also saw occasional spillover across the Nigerian border.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo also gained independence from Belgium in 1960, but quickly devolved into a period of political upheaval and conflict known as the Congo Crisis (1960–1965) which ended with the installment of Joseph Mobutu as president and renamed the country Zaire in 1971.
The Dja and Kadéï drain southeastward into the Congo River.
The Douala International Airport is located in the eastern part of the city.
The Douala-Yaoundé railway line, begun under the German regime, was completed.
The Duala (or Sawa) are a Bantu ethnic group of Cameroon.
The Duala are Bantu in language and origin.
The Duala are a Bantu ethnic group of Cameroon.
The Duala are primarily concentrated in Cameroon's Littoral Province in the Moungo, Nkam, and Wouri divisions.
The Duala are related to several ethnic groups (or tribes) in the Cameroon Coastal areas, with whom they share a common traditional origin, and similar histories and cultures.
The Duala continued to prosper.
The Duala emerged by the 16th century as the leading traders on the Cameroonian coast, though the Isubu and Limba did not trail far behind.
The Duala had gained a virtual hegemony over trade through the Wouri estuary.
The Duala had long kept and traded slaves, who lived in separate settlements and performed menial tasks such as cultivation.
The Duala have been mostly Christianized since the 1930s.
The Duala have dominated the others historically, and these other groups all profess some sort of kinship to them.
The Duala have traditionally practiced polygamy, although with the introduction of Christianity, this custom has become rarer.
The Duala language is a member Bantu group, closely related to other Duala languages, a dialect continuum including Malimba.
The Duala leadership in 1884 placed the tribe under German rule.
The Duala remained important in this process.
The Duala then drove them inland, a displacement that likely occurred in the late 17th or early 18th century.
The Duala today are divided into the urban and rural.
The Duala trace their ancestry back to a man named Mbedi, who lived in an area called Bakota in what is today Gabon or the Republic of the Congo.
The Dualas readily welcomed German and French colonial policies.
The Ekang phase is intensely musical and usually lasts all night.
The Empire began to decline in the seventeenth century though it continued to control much of northern Cameroon.
The Empire was Muslim from at least the eleventh century and reached its first peak in the 13th, controlling most of what is now Chad and smaller regions in surrounding countries.
The February–March 1959 eruption produced basanite–hawaiite lava with a mean effusion rate of 13–18 m3 s−1 and a volume of about 3.4×107 m3.
The Final on June 29 against France, consequently, became not about the game but rather an occasion for both teams and fans to honor Foé.
The French administration declined to return much of the property in Cameroon to its prior German owners, reassigning much of it to French companies.
The French authorities repressed these events and made arbitrary arrests.
The French mandate was known as Cameroun, and comprised most of the former German territory.
The French military and native security forces violently repressed these uprisings, which led to many native Cameroonians joining the cause of independence and long-running guerilla war.
The French thus encouraged people from the interior to move to the coast and work the plantations (settled well away from the influence of the Duala chiefs).
The French-speaking people are often inhabitants of the southern and western regions and the majority of them are Catholic, while English-speaking citizens more to the west tend to be Protestants.
The French-speaking regions of the southern and western regions are largely Catholic.
The Fula, Fulani, or Fulɓe people are an ethnic group in the Sahara, Sahel, and West Africa, widely dispersed across the region.
The Fulani are mainly Muslims, because Islam is the dominant religion in the northern region.
The Fulani people are predominantly found in the northern regions.
The Future is an Ancient Lake.
The Future is an Ancient Lake: Traditional Knowledge, Biodiversity and Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture in Lake Chad Basin Ecosystems.
The General Alphabet of Cameroon Languages was developed in the late 1970s as an orthographic system for all Cameroonian languages.
The Geography of Modern Africa.
The German Empire claimed the territory as the colony of Kamerun in 1884 and began a steady push inland; the natives resisted in the Bafut Wars and Adamawa Wars.
The Germans initially ruled from Douala, which they called Kamerunstadt, but they moved their capital to the Bakweri settlement of Buea in 1901.
The HIV/AIDS prevalence rate in 2016 was estimated at 3.8% for those aged 15–49, although a strong stigma against the illness keeps the number of reported cases artificially low.
The IG and the AGovC declared their willingness to have their armed groups follow suit, but conditioned it on international monitoring and Cameroonian troops being confined to their bases.
The IG demanded that the Cameroonian government account for the missing inmates, threatening to impose a lockdown encompassing the entire Anglophone regions if it failed to do so.
The IG has stressed that the war will take place solely within Southern Cameroons, and claims that attacks across the border have been false flag operations by the Cameroonian government.
The Imbangala formed the slave-raiding state of Kasanje, a major source of slaves during the 17th and 18th centuries.
The Imbangala of inland Angola claimed descent from a founder, Kinguri, brother of Queen Rweej, who could not tolerate the rule of mulopwe Tshibunda.
The Indomitable Lions is the national football team of Cameroon.
The Indomitable Lions were the first team to be mathematically eliminated in the 2010 World Cup, going out in their second group match to Denmark after losing 1–2, preceded by a 0–1 defeat to Japan.
The Inland Waters of Tropical Africa: An Introduction to Tropical Limnology Hardcover (1th ed.).
The Isibheqe Sohlamvu or Ditema tsa Dinoko script is a featural syllabary used to write the Sintu or Southern Bantu languages.
The Islamist jihadist group Ansar al-Islam has been reported as operating in North Cameroon.
The Kanem Empire began in Chad in the eighth century and gradually extended its influence northward into Libya and southward into Nigeria and Cameroon.
The Kanem empire went into decline, shrank, and in the 14th century was defeated by Bilala invaders from the Lake Fitri region.
The Kanem-Bornu Empire began in what is now Chad and likely came into conflict with the Sao.
The Kanuri people of West Africa led by the Sayfuwa migrated to the west and south of the lake, where they established the Bornu Empire.
The Kingdom of Baguirmi existed as an independent state during the 16th and 17th centuries southeast of West-Central Africa Lake Chad region in what is now the country of Chad.
The League of Nations mandates were converted into United Nations Trusteeships in 1946, and the question of independence became a pressing issue in French Cameroon.
The Logone flows northward into Lake Chad, which Cameroon shares with three neighbouring countries.
The Luba political system was retained, and conquered peoples were integrated into the system.
The Luena (Lwena) and Lozi (Luyani) in Zambia also claim descent from Kinguri.
The Lunda linked Central Africa with the western coast trade.
The Lunda's western expansion also saw claims of descent by the Yaka and the Pende.
The Mandombe script is an abugida that is used to write the Bantu languages of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, mainly by the Kimbanguist movement.
The Mbo who speak a Narrow Bantu language clustered closely with Grassfields speakers.
The Mbum who migrated to their current location from Northern Cameroon are the ancestors of all Grassfields people and now reside in the Adamawa province of Cameroon.
The Mountain Lions claimed responsibility for the attack.
The Mungo River may refer to: Mungo River, Cameroon Mungo River, New Zealand Mungo (disambiguation)
The Muslim empires of the Sahara and Sahel never reached further south than the highlands of the Cameroon Line.
The Muslim-majority Northern area opted for union with Nigeria, and the Southern area voted to join Cameroon.
The NGO suggested that companies make deals with the separatists in order to safeguard their facilities.
The National Assembly elects the members of a nine-member High Court of Justice that judges high-ranking members of government in the event they are charged with high treason or harming national security.
The National Assembly makes legislation.
The National Institute of Statistics of Cameroon reported that four percent of the indigenous languages have disappeared since 1950.
The Nigerians among the rebels mostly consisted of criminals and ex-insurgents who had previously taken part in the conflict in the Niger Delta.
The Palace Dika Akwa Mukanda was built in 1990.
The Portuguese in the latter part of the 16th century tried to gain control of Ndongo but were defeated by the Mbundu.
The Portuguese navigator and explorer Fernão do Pó or Fernando Pó, is believed to be the first European to explore the estuary of the Wouri, around the year 1472.
The Portuguese settled along the coast as trade dealers, not venturing on conquest of the interior.
The President of Cameroon is elected and creates policy, administers government agencies, commands the armed forces, negotiates and ratifies treaties, and declares a state of emergency.
The RDPC continues to dominate the National Assembly, which does little more than approve his policies.
The Red Dragon militia successfully ambushed a military vehicle in Alou with an IED on 24 April, while the Seven Karta militia carried out a similar IED attack in Bafut.
The Republican Guard under Colonel Saleh Ibrahim took control of the Yaounde airport, national radio station, and other key points around the capital.
The Rough Guide to West Africa (3rd ed.).
The Royal Spanish Football Federation fined Eto'o €12,000 for his comments, for which he later apologized.
The SCNC sent a delegation, led by John Foncha, to the United Nations, which was received on 1 June 1995 and presented a petition against the 'annexation' of the Southern Cameroons by French Cameroon.
The SDF said that the clashes had made it impossible for its candidates to campaign.
The Sanaga River (formerly German: Zannaga) is the largest river in Cameroon located in East Region, Centre Region and Littoral Region.
The Sanaga River forms a boundary between two tropical moist forest ecoregions.
The Sanaga River has its source at the Adamawa Plateau.
The Sanaga River powers the largest hydroelectric station, located at Edéa.
The Sao culture arose around Lake Chad, c.
The Sao lived by the Chari River south of Lake Chad in territory that later became part of Cameroon and Chad.
The Sao were displaced or assimilated by the sixteenth century.
The Scramble for Africa beginning in the late 1870s, saw European powers, primarily seeking to establish formal control over the parts of Africa not yet colonized.
The Shilluk Kingdom was centered in South Sudan from the 15th century from along a strip of land along the western bank of White Nile, from Lake No to about 12° north latitude.
The South Cameroon Plateau rises from the coastal plain to an average elevation of 650 metres (2,133 ft).
The South Province (Sud) lies on the Gulf of Guinea and the southern border.
The Tunisian Football Federation decided to cancel the post-game recovery session of the Tunisia national football team due to "terrorist threats".
The Tunjur people founded the Wadai Kingdom to the east of Bornu in the 16th century.
The UPC was banned and nearly 800 of its activists were arrested, many of whom would be beaten in prison.
The UPC was ultimately defeated with government forces capturing the last important rebel leader in 1970.
The UPC, many among whom espoused Marxist or other leftist ideologies and had demanded a full break with France, were not satisfied with Ahidjo's rule and close cooperation with the French.
The Union of the Peoples of Cameroon (UPC) political party advocated independence but was outlawed by France in the 1950s, leading to a national liberation insurgency between French Armed Forces and the Union of the Peoples of Cameroon (UPC) until January 1971.
The United Nations Office for Central Africa also includes Burundi and Rwanda in the region, which are considered part of East Africa in the geoscheme.
The United Nations approved the Trusteeship Agreements for British Cameroons to be governed by Britain on June 12, 1946.
The United Nations organised a plebiscite in the region on 11 February 1961 which put two alternatives to the people: union with Nigeria or union with Cameroon.
The United States condemned the loss of life and brutality against Anglophone protesters.
The United States has been particularly vocal in its criticism; In July 2019, following a fact-finding mission by some of its members to the country, the House of Representatives called for a reintroduction of a federal system in Cameroon.
The University of Yaounde is one of the oldest universities in Cameroon.
The Wadai Empire was centered in Chad from the 17th century.
The West African Sao civilization flourished from ca.
The West-Central African kingdom of Kanem–Bornu Empire was centered in the Lake Chad Basin.
The Wouri (also Vouri or Vuri) is a river in Cameroon.
The Wouri River flows through Douala into the Atlantic Ocean.
The Wouri estuary, where the Wouri, Mungo, and Dibamba Rivers empty, forms the centre of Duala country.
The Wouri forms at the confluence of the rivers Nkam and Makombé, 32 km (20 mi) northeast of the city of Yabassi.
The Wouri is a river in Cameroon.
The Yemba who are Grassfields people clustered closely to Northern Bantoid speakers.
The accounting of oil revenues was totally opaque and many Cameroonians felt the money was mismanaged or embezzled since.
The action was led by "General Kolambo".
The activists demanded protection of the law system of the Anglophone regions and opposed the civil law system used by the Francophone magistrate replacing the common law system.
The adverse effects of reduced water sources on fishing, farming, and herding outweigh the benefits of new land from the receding waters.
The agreement reached was a new constitution, based heavily on the version adopted in Cameroon earlier that year, but with a federal structure granting former British Cameroons - now West Cameroon - jurisdiction over certain issues and procedural rights.
The airport is in dire need of renovations due to poor circulation and old infrastructure.
The airport is the busiest in the CEMAC area and is the hub for Cameroon's national carrier, Camairco.
The amount represented 15% of the £17.7 million (US$29 million) fee which Inter paid Barcelona in July 2009.
The animal husbandry was severely affected by the droughts of the 1970s and 1980s.
The annual Mount Cameroon Race of Hope scales the peak in around 4+1⁄2 hours.
The archaeological discovery revealed wild grasses, mostly of the tribe Paniceae, and wild rice together with the earliest domesticated Pearl millet in the Lake Chad region, dating to 1200–1000 cal BC.
The archives which provide documentation about the city are based in Paris, Basel, Hamburg, Potsdam, Douala and Yaoundé.
The area of Lake Chad experienced four heydays between 39,000 BC and 300 BC, leaving thick diatomaceous earth and lacustrine deposits in the strata.
The area of permanent vegetation has increased from about 3,800 km2 (1,500 sq mi) in 2000 to about 5,200 km2 (2,000 sq mi) in 2020 as water levels have dropped and temperatures have increased.
The area once reached 5,075 square kilometres (1,959 sq mi) in 2000, and the average area of surface water from 2013 to 2016 was about 1,876 km2 (724 sq mi), with the largest area being 2,231 km2 (861 sq mi) in July 2015.
The area was administered by Nigeria through the colonial era.
The army has claimed that the soldiers who were filmed were separatists wearing stolen Cameroonian Army uniforms, a claim that has been denied by local residents.
The army said that it had killed ten separatists and captured three.
The attack was claimed by ADF leader, Ayaba Cho Lucas.
The attack was led by General No Pity.
The attack was regarded as notable because Matouke is located less than 40 kilometers from Douala, the economic capital of Cameroon.
The attack was reportedly carried out by the Bui Unity Warriors.
The attackers left a note with a warning for collaborators, along with an Ambazonian flag.
The average annual inflow of the Chari River and the Logone River from 1970 to 1990 was only 55% of that from 1950 to 1970.
The average annual precipitation in the Lake Chad area is 330 mm (13 in), with an average annual precipitation of 560 mm (22.0 in) on the south bank and about 250 mm (9.8 in) on the north bank.
The average depth of the southern lake basin is between .5 and 2 m (1 ft 8 in and 6 ft 7 in), that of the northern lake basin is between 0 and 1.8 m (5 ft 11 in), and that of the eastern archipelago is between 0 and 2 m (6 ft 7 in).
The average elevation is about 3,300 feet (1,000 meters), but elevations can reach as high as 8,700 feet (2,700 meters).
The ban was reduced to eight months in January 2012, meaning Eto'o would only miss four competitive matches.
The band played an extremely popular form of bikutsi that allowed for greater depth and diversity.
The band's image was part of its success, and they became known for their shaved heads and multi-colored body painting, done to represent traditional Beti scarification, as well as torn T-shirts that implied a common folkness in contrast to the well-styled pop-makossa performers of the period.
The banking sector is highly concentrated and dominated by foreign commercial banks.
The best-known contemporary genre is makossa, a popular style that has gained fans across Africa, and its related dance craze bikutsi.
The best-known is the Kebra Negast, or "Book of Kings", from the 14th century AD.
The body consists of 180 members who are elected for five-year terms and meet three times per year.
The border saw further clashes several times throughout the 1980s.
The borders of modern Cameroon were established through a series of negotiations with the British and French.
The boundary change triggered a local separatist insurgency, as many Bakassians refused to accept Cameroonian rule.
The bridge is meant to be commissioned before the end of 2018.
The building is shaped like a boat (however, the museum only occupies 400 m2 of the building).
The capital and royal residence were in the town of Fashoda.
The capital city of Cameroon is Yaounde.
The capital city of the country is Yaoundé.
The capital was M'banza-Kongo.
The celebrations were boycotted in most major cities in the Anglophone regions, including Buea, Kumbo, Belo, Ndop, Ndu, Wum, Muyuka, Mamfe, Tombem, Mundemba and Lebialem, while there was a comparatively significant turnout in Nkambe.
The change also provided for the President to enjoy immunity from prosecution for his actions as president after leaving office.
The change was brought about after Cameroon President Paul Biya asked officials to reconsider the controversial sanction.
The changing geography of Africa and the Middle East.
The chief is also considered the 'father' of the chiefdom.
The chief, or fon or fong is considered as the spiritual, political, judicial and military leader.
The children are going to school to get a good education.
The citizens of Cameroon are entitled to freedom of religion, as it is stated within their constitution.
The city is located on the banks of the Wouri River, the two sides linked by Bonaberi Bridge.
The city of Douala is divided into seven districts (Akwa, Bassa, Bonabéri, Bonapriso, Bonanjo, Deïdo and New Bell) and it has more than 120 neighbourhoods.
The city of Douala is home to a number of higher education institutions, including the University of Douala.
The city sits on the estuary of the Wouri River and its climate is tropical.
The city-states of the Sao reached their apex sometime between the ninth and fifteenth centuries AD.
The class is indicated by a prefix that is part of the noun, as well as agreement markers on verb and qualificative roots connected with the noun.
The classification of the Bantu languages.
The climate of the Lake Chad region is strongly influenced by continental and maritime air masses.
The coach made headlines by announcing that stars such as Ronaldinho, Deco, and Eto'o were not part of his plans; Eto'o ultimately remained with the club, while the other two players departed, although Eto'o and Guardiola had several reported disagreements throughout the season.
The coastal Duala purchased goods and slaves from interior groups such as the Bakweri, Mungo, Bassa and Bakoko.
The coastal plain extends 15 to 150 kilometres (9 to 93 mi) inland from the Gulf of Guinea and has an average elevation of 90 metres (295 ft).
The collection of forest products such as gum arabic, honey, beeswax, and firewood is of great significance in the region.
The colonial politics focused on commerce and some exploration of the unoccupied territories.
The commercial bushmeat trade has now surpassed deforestation as the main threat to wildlife in Cameroon.
The commission was chaired by Mohamed Ibn Chambas and had met 38 times by 2015.
The commission's responsibilities included demarcating the entirety of the Cameroon–Nigeria border, facilitating cross-border cooperation and troop withdrawals from Bakassi, and protecting the rights of locals.
The commission's tasks include managing Lake Chad and its water resources, protecting the ecosystem, and promoting regional integration, peace, security, and development in the Lake Chad region.
The communiqué called for negotiations and a switch to nonviolent resistance, and for fighters to only use their weapons defensively pending an agreement.
The competing claims grew contentious after oil was discovered in the region.
The competitiveness of the election was not to Biya's liking and subsequent elections have been widely criticized by opposition parties and international observers as rigged and suffering from numerous and widespread irregularities.
The conference issued the "Buea Declaration", which called for constitutional amendments to restore the 1961 federation.
The conflict has severely harmed the local economy.
The conflict has triggered an exodus of the Nigerian business community from Southern Cameroons, as well as Nigerian traders who used to run key markets.
The conflict indirectly led to an upsurge in Boko Haram attacks, as the Cameroonian military largely withdrew from the north to focus on fighting the Ambazonian separatists.
The constitution divides Cameroon into 10 semi-autonomous regions, each under the administration of an elected Regional Council.
The construction of this bridge is important for Cameroon's economy and will facilitate exchanges in the central African region which opens to the world through Cameroon and its proximity to the Atlantic Ocean.
The corpse of "General Ayeke" was flown to Kumba where it was publicly displayed.
The countries of the basin regained their independence between 1956 and 1962, retaining the colonial administrative boundaries.
The country has rainforests, mountains, savanna and beaches.
The country is located in Central Africa and West Africa, on the Bight of Bonny, part of the Gulf of Guinea and the Atlantic Ocean.
The country is nicknamed "Little Africa" as geographically, Cameroon consists of coastline, mountains, grass plains, forest, rainforest and desert, all of the geographical regions in Africa in one country.
The country is often referred to as "Africa in miniature" for its geological, linguistic, and cultural diversity.
The country was renamed the United Republic of Cameroon in 1972 and back to the Republic of Cameroon in 1984 by a presidential decree by President Paul Biya.
The country's name in Portuguese remains Camarões.
The country's neighbours are Nigeria and the Atlantic Ocean to the west; Chad to the northeast; the Central African Republic to the east; and Equatorial Guinea, Gabon and the Republic of the Congo to the south.
The coverage of reserves was initially about 4 percent of the country's area, rising to 12 percent; the administration proposes to cover 30 percent of the land area.
The culture possibly arose as early as the fourth century BC but certainly, by the end of the first millennium BC, their presence was well established around Lake Chad and near the Chari River.
The current account and fiscal deficits widened, and foreign debt grew.
The dances' purposes range from pure entertainment to religious devotion.
The delayed AFCON is scheduled to be held in Limbe and Buea starting on 9 January.
The demand was based on a Spanish rule that a player should get 15% of the amount of his transfer to another Spanish club.
The demonstrators were severely repressed with reports of a hundred dead and thousands of arrests.
The development of a rigorous genealogical classification of many branches of Niger–Congo, not just Bantu, is hampered by insufficient data.
The diplomacy of partition: Britain, France, and the creation of Nigeria, 1890–1898.
The districts, administered by district heads (chefs de district), are the smallest administrative units.
The divisions are further split into sub-divisions (arrondissements), headed by assistant divisional officers (sous-prefets).
The dominant vegetation is tussock grasses, with scattered fire-tolerant shrubs and low trees.
The driver of the bus tried to escape the scene before being apprehended and taken to a police station.
The drop in commodity prices for its principal exports – petroleum, cocoa, coffee, and cotton – in the mid-1980s, combined with an overvalued currency and economic mismanagement, led to a decade-long recession.
The earliest Duala merchants were likely chiefs or headmen.
The earliest discovered archaeological evidence of humans dates from around 30,000 years ago at Shum Laka.
The earliest known civilization to have left clear traces of their presence in the territory of modern Cameroon is known as the Sao civilisation.
The earliest recorded popular music from Cameroon comes from the 1930s, when the most popular styles were imported pop music and French-style chanson.
The early European presence in Cameroon was primarily devoted to coastal trade and the acquisition of slaves.
The early missionaries learned the Duala language and invented a written form for it, as Bible translation was one of their earliest priorities.
The east and west sides are outward dipping low angle gentle slope areas.
The eastern boundary fault is steep with a dip angle of about 55°, while the western fault has a dip angle of about 45°.
The economy of Cameroon was one of the most prosperous in Africa for a quarter of a century after independence.
The educational system is a mixture of British and French precedents, with most instruction in English or French.
The election was marred by violence and low voter turnout.
The empire dissolved into petty polities, fighting among each other for war captives to sell into slavery.
The endangered toad Amietophrynus djohongensis is known to exist in the wild only in the Cameroonian part of the Adamawa Plateau.
The entire Chad Basin has 179 species of fish, of which 127 are the same as the Niger River Basin, 85 are the same as the Nile River Basin, 47 are the same as the Congo River Basin, and 84 fish species are distributed in the lake.
The eru is cooked with waterleaf or spinach, palm oil, crayfish, and either smoked fish, cow skin (kanda) or beef.
The eruption lasted about 22–30 days.
The eruption of 28 April-June 1909 caused the German colonial government of Kamerun to temporarily move from Buea to Douala.
The eruption produced explosive cinder cones at higher elevations and quieter spatter cones at lower elevations.
The ethnicities of Cameroon include an estimated 250 distinct ethnic groups in five regional-cultural divisions.
The event did not produce significant lava flows.
The explorers noted an abundance of the mud lobster Lepidophthalmus turneranus in the Wouri River and named it "Rio dos Camarões", Portuguese for "River of Prawns", and the phrase from which the name Cameroon derived.
The faction of the movement aligned with Samuel Ikome Sako has continued to insist that the talks facilitated by Switzerland are the only means of resolving the conflict.
The family will then gather the wet earth and shape it into a circle.
The federal republic was composed of two federated states, East Cameroon and West Cameroon, each with its own legislature, government, and prime minister.
The federation was abandoned in 1972.
The first Europeans to visit the area were the Portuguese in about 1472.
The first multiparty elections were held in 1992 and were hotly contested.
The first phase was to build internal capability to resist the Cameroonian Army and raise faith in the cause.
The first route originated in the North between the Lake Tchad area and the Nile Valley.
The floor of the basin is made of Precambrian bedrock covered by more than 3,600 m (11,800 ft) of sedimentary deposits.
The flow of the river was measured at Edéa in m3/s: Beginning at the headwaters, there are 2 dams on the Sanaga River: The Camrail railway bridges the Sanaga River at Edea.
The following decade, however, saw Les Tetes Brulées surpass previous artists in international popularity though their reaction at home was mixed.
The following is a list of match results in the last 12 months, as well as any future matches that have been scheduled.
The following is a list of nominal classes in Bantu languages: Virtually all Bantu languages have a subject–verb–object word order, with some exceptions, such as the Nen language, which has a subject–object–verb word order.
The following list of languages in Cameroon is mostly based from Ethnologue.
The following players have also been called up for the team in the last twelve months and are still available for selection.
The following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980–2022.
The fon typically has 9 ministers and several other advisers and councils.
The forests are diverse and species-rich, with numerous lianas.
The former UFC Heavyweight Champion, Francis Ngannou, hails from Cameroon.
The four confessed to being involved with weapons smuggling.
The four countries along the lake are all facing the problem of extreme poverty, and due to the difficulty in meeting their livelihoods, some local residents have been involved in drug and arms trade.
The game ended 1–0 and meant that Barcelona kept a six-point lead over Real Madrid in the league.
The global proportion of individuals literate in official languages has thus markedly increased between 1987 and 2005, rising from 53.3% to 71.2%.
The government also implemented an Internet blockade in cities across the Anglophone regions.
The government announced lower fuel prices, increased wages for the military and civil servants, and decreased duties on key foodstuffs and construction materials.
The government crackdown on the protests contributed to mainstream separatist movements.
The government cut the internet on the Anglophone side for about three months.
The government embarked upon a series of economic reform programs supported by the World Bank and International Monetary Fund (IMF) beginning in the late 1980s.
The government failed to meet the conditions of the first four IMF programs.
The government has also set up rehab centers in Bamenda and Buea to reintegrate separatists who have surrendered into civil society.
The government has established several bilingual schools in an effort to teach both languages more evenly; however, in reality most of these schools separate the anglophone and francophone sections and therefore do not provide a true bilingual experience.
The government has fired and replaced local administrators who fled from the region, despite their fears of kidnappings.
The government has taken measures to encourage tourism in the country.
The government recognises the authority of traditional chiefs, fons, and lamibe to govern at the local level and to resolve disputes as long as such rulings do not conflict with national law.
The government responded with a military offensive, and the insurgency spread across the Northwest and Southwest regions.
The government used oil money to create a national cash reserve, pay farmers, and finance major development projects; however, many initiatives failed when Ahidjo appointed unqualified allies to direct them.
The government uses Israeli armored vehicles, and Cameroon's Rapid Reaction Force, (often referred to by its French acronym BIR) is equipped and trained by Israel.
The governments only enforced rules and regulations to a limited extent.
The group accused the abducted civilians of attempting to get birth certificates for the upcoming 2025 Cameroonian presidential election, and threatened to summarily execute them.
The habitats of these species include the southern region comprising tropical lowland, coastline on the Gulf of Guinea.
The head of the Real Madrid fan club federation remained unimpressed, however, stating, "This character is a fantastic player, but he leaves a lot to be desired as a person." He signed an improved contract with Barcelona in June 2005.
The headquarters of the committee is located in N'Djamena, Chad.
The high-quality clay of the western highlands is used for pottery and ceramics.
The highest temperature in the rainy season is 30 °C (86 °F), and the highest temperature rises to more than 32 °C (90 °F) when October and November enter the dry season.
The history of the Empire is mainly known from the Royal Chronicle or Girgam discovered in 1851 by the German traveler Heinrich Barth.
The inability of countries along the lake to consider the protection of Lake Chad has led to a series of environmental problems.
The influence of France and its 9,000 nationals in Cameroon remains considerable.
The infobox at right lists these together with various low-level groups that are fairly uncontroversial, though they continue to be revised.
The initiative aims to save thousands of African children's lives annually.
The internet has also changed the landscape of African literature, leading to the rise of digital reading and publishing platforms such as OkadaBooks.
The invasion was condemned by the Biafra Nations League (BNL), a Biafran separatist group with otherwise friendly relations with the Ambazonian movement.
The judgement was severely criticized by human rights groups including Amnesty International.
The judiciary is officially divided into tribunals, the court of appeal, and the supreme court.
The kidnapping was attributed to the Red Dragon militia.
The kingdom of Lunda came to an end in the 19th century when it was invaded by the Chokwe, who were armed with guns.
The kingdom was founded during the mid-15th century CE by its first ruler, Nyikang.
The kingdom was not as welcoming as Kongo; it viewed the Portuguese with great suspicion and as an enemy.
The kingdom's first ruler was Mbang Birni Besse.
The lake has been designated an Important Bird Area (IBA) by BirdLife International.
The lake is rich in aquatic resources and is one of the important freshwater fish producing areas in Africa.
The lake seeps through the underground to the lowest point of the Chad Basin, the Bodélé Depression, approximately 480 km (300 mi) northeast of Lake Chad, with the deepest point reaching an elevation of only 155 m (509 ft) above sea level.
The lake was able to flow out of the Bahr el-Ghazal during the rainy season.
The lakeside is rich in reeds and swamps, and the plain along the lake is fertile, making it an important irrigated agricultural area.
The languages that share Dahl's law may also form a valid group, Northeast Bantu.
The largest Sao archaeological finds have been made south of Lake Chad.
The largest conflicts were the Bafut Wars and the Adamawa Wars which ended by 1907 with German victories.
The last German fort in the country surrendered in February 1916.
The last parliamentary elections were held on 9 February 2020.
The latter king resisted and refused until his death to cooperate with the German administration, which he did not trust.
The lawyers refused to talk, demanding that all arrested activists be released before any dialogue.
The lawyers submitted a draft for a federal state, and the government responded by banning their movements altogether.
The leaders established another state at Matamba, affiliated with Queen Nzinga, who put up a strong resistance to the Portuguese until coming to terms with them.
The leaders then refused to be tried by Francophone judges.
The leadership and many members of the SCNC were subsequently arrested.
The life expectancy was 62.3 years (60.6 years for males and 64 years for females).
The local indigenous language is Duala, which shares its name with the city.
The lockdown started on 29 July.
The lockdown was a matter of controversy among the separatists, with a spokesperson of the Ambazonia Defence Forces arguing that it would be counterproductive.
The longest continuous inhabitants are groups such as the Baka (Pygmies).
The lower montane forests are composed of evergreen trees, which form a 20–25-metre-high (65–80 ft) canopy that is either closed or discontinuous.
The lower montane forests are diverse and species-rich, with characteristic Afromontane plants and endemic species.
The lower montane forests, together with the higher-elevation forests, scrub, and grasslands, are part of the Mount Cameroon and Bioko montane forests ecoregion.
The lowland forests are part of the Cross-Sanaga-Bioko coastal forests ecoregion.
The main Duala villages soon grew into a prospering township named Douala for the people who lived there.
The main economic activities of Central Africa are farming, herding and fishing.
The main plant communities on the mountain include: Lowland rain forest predominates on the lower slopes, from sea level to 800 metres (2,600 ft) elevation.
The main violent riots took place in the Western, English-speaking part of the country starting with a "strike" initiated by taxi drivers in Douala, allegedly causing more than 200 casualties in the end.
The maize and cassava would result in population growth in the region and other parts of Africa, replacing millet as the main staple.
The major radio and television stations are state-run and other communications, such as land-based telephones and telegraphs, are largely under government control.
The majority faith is Christianity, practised by about two-thirds of the population, while Islam is a significant minority faith, adhered to by about one-fourth.
The maritime air mass moves northward during the summer, producing seasonal precipitation.
The market in Douala is very busy in the morning.
The masks are performed by men and aim to support and enforce royal authority.
The material covers a wide array of topics, including astronomy, poetry, law, history, faith, politics, and philosophy.
The maximum depth of Mega-Chad exceeded 180 m (590 ft) and it covered an area of approximately 400,000 km2 (150,000 sq mi), it flowed into Benue River through the Mayo Kébbi, which drains into the Atlantic Ocean through the Niger River.
The meal is made from cocoyam and unripe bananas, which are pounded into a smooth dough.
The middle of the 20th century saw the popularization of a native folk music called bikutsi.
The miemba serve to let their members network and socialise.
The military escort came under fire while driving to the ceremony, possibly resulting in casualties.
The military has been involved in defeating rebellions, controlling protests for democratic reforms, combating Boko Haram since 2014, and handling the Anglophone separatist movement that began in 2017.
The military is crucial in supporting Cameroon's authoritarian government since independence in 1960.
The military was deployed against the protesters and people were killed, hundreds imprisoned and thousands fled the country.
The militias enjoy significant local support, with civilians giving them food, informing them on troop movements, or outright assisting them in carrying out attacks.
The minister also announced a plan to rebuild infrastructure that had been destroyed due to the conflict.
The ministers are in charge of the crowning of the new fon.
The month also saw the first major spillover into other parts of Cameroon; On 29 November, at least 30 people were kidnapped by ten unidentified gunmen in Bangourain, West Region, and transported with canoes across the Lake Bamendjing reservoir.
The morphological shape of Bantu words is typically CV, VCV, CVCV, VCVCV, etc.; that is, any combination of CV (with possibly a V- syllable at the start).
The most notable holiday associated with patriotism in Cameroon is National Day, also called Unity Day.
The most prominent grammatical characteristic of Bantu languages is the extensive use of affixes (see Sotho grammar and Ganda noun classes for detailed discussions of these affixes).
The most recent eruption occurred on February 3, 2012.
The most recent form of Cameroonian popular music is a fusion of Congolese soukous and makossa, a scene which has produced Petit Pays, Marcel Bwanga, Kotto Bass, Papillon and Jean Pierre Essome.
The most widely spoken Bantu language by number of speakers is Swahili, with 16 million native speakers and 80 million L2 speakers (2015).
The most widely used classification is an alphanumeric coding system developed by Malcolm Guthrie in his 1948 classification of the Bantu languages.
The mountain is part of the area of volcanic activity known as the Cameroon Volcanic Line, which also includes Lake Nyos, the site of a disaster in 1986.
The mountain's natural vegetation varies with elevation.
The move has been criticised by many, especially Pan-Africanists, accusing France of playing neocolonialism with Cameroon and also accusing Biya of being a French puppet.
The music of the Cameroon includes diverse traditional and modern musical genres.
The mwata yamvo assigned a cilool or kilolo (royal adviser) and tax collector to each state conquered.
The name "Ambazonia" is taken from Ambas Bay and Ambozes, the local name of the mouth of the Wouri River.
The name can be loosely translated as beating the ground continuously.
The name of the districts refer to the Douala lineage, as well as the neighborhoods.
The name “achu” is used in the Northwest region, while in the West region it is called “taro.” The climate and soil in these areas greatly favor the different types of cocoyam used in preparing this delicious dish.
The nation strives toward bilingualism, but in reality a small minority (11.6%) Cameroonians are literate in both French and English, and 28.8% are literate in neither.
The national and local levels have been known to work together, even though they have to deal with their own separate issues from each other.
The national culture is established through public institutions such as school, the multiparty political system, shared history of colonialism and a national love of football.
The national flag was changed on 20 May 1975 with the two stars removed and replaced with a large central star as a symbol of national unity.
The national team has been one of the most successful in Africa since its strong showing in the 1982 and 1990 FIFA World Cups.
The native population showed little interest in volunteering for the British forces during World War II; only 3,500 men did so.
The natives have been taught discipline and have come to realize what can be achieved by industry.
The natron produced in the depression on the northeast bank of the lake has long been of significant economic significance.
The new colonials maintained the German policies of ousting uncooperative rulers and of impressing workers for the plantations.
The newcomers grew numerically and economically dominant over time, leading to ethnic tensions with the indigenes.
The next bikutsi performer of legendary stature was Messi Me Nkonda Martin and his band, Los Camaroes, who added electric guitars and other new elements.
The next day, Cameroon celebrated its annual Unity Day.
The next day, Cameroonian soldiers ambushed and killed at least 13 suspected separatists in Donga-Mantung, and another 25 near Nkambé the next day.
The next day, an improvised explosive device killed one soldier and injured four soldiers, two police officers and one civilian in Bamenda.
The next day, armed men kidnapped 30 bus passengers passing through Belo, in an apparent case of infighting among local separatist militias.
The next day, five Cameroonian soldiers, including a brigade commander, were killed when separatist militia the Bambalang Marine Forces attacked an army outpost in Noni in Bui.
The next day, it was reported that Pidgin journalist Samuel Wazizi, who had been arrested on 3 August 2019 over alleged ties with separatists, had died at a military hospital after being tortured by Cameroonian soldiers.
The next day, large parts of Buea were closed down, while armed clashes took place in Muea and Muyuka.
The next day, security forces carried out mass arrests in Buea as they searched for separatist bases.
The next day, suspected separatists burned a beer truck in Likomba, Fako Division.
The next season, in the winter transfer window, he transferred to La Liga team Mallorca on loan, where he scored six goals in 19 games.
The next tier consisted of the Wajili, either non-Duala peoples or the descendants of slaves.
The next year, he joined Bastia, where he spent four seasons.
The northern lowland region extends from the edge of the Adamawa to Lake Chad with an average elevation of 300 to 350 metres (984 to 1,148 ft).
The northern part of Cameroon is heavily occupied by the Fulani people (Fula: Fulɓe; French: Peul or Peulh; also known Mbororo, though this has sometimes been seen as pejorative).
The northern part of the basin appears steep in the west and gentle in the east on the profile.
The northern peoples are Sudanic groups, who live in the central highlands and the northern lowlands, and the Fulani, who are spread throughout northern Cameroon.
The northern portion of the territory was formally handed over to the Cameroonian government in August 2006, and the remainder of the peninsula was left to Cameroon two years later, in 2008.
The number of German-speaking Africans increased in central African German colonies prior to 1914.
The number of distinct ethnic and linguistic groups in Cameroon is estimated to be between 230 and 282.
The number of goals he had scored in the Indonesian local championship surpassed the number of matches he had even played in the competition, with 41 goals coming in just 35 matches over a period of two years.
The number of languages makes Cameroon one of the most linguistically diverse countries in the world.
The objective was to neutralize any potential feelings of independence or sympathy for the former German colonizer.
The official languages of Cameroon are French and English.
The official percentage of French and English speakers by the Presidency of Cameroon is estimated to be 70% and 30% respectively.
The oil industry is an important part of the Cameroonian economy.
The oldest male in the family keeps the skulls of both male and female ancestors in a dwelling that the family built and a diviner has blessed.
The once common large mammals include red-fronted gazelle, dama gazelle, patas monkey, striped hyena, cheetah and caracal, while African elephant, otter, hippopotamus, sitatunga and kob are distributed in the wetlands.
The online version of the New Updated Guthrie List, a referential classification of the Bantu languages goto.glocalnet.net, 4 June 2009, 120pp.
The others were released between 4–6 March, after their families had paid money.
The overall thickness of the inner layer in the slope area is relatively thin.
The palm oil and cocoa sectors in Southwest Region had taken a severe blow, with state-owned company Pamol abandoning plantations in some areas.
The park includes the former Etinde Forest Reserve and most of the Bomboko Forest Reserve.
The part of the plateau that lies in Nigeria is more popularly known as Gotel Mountains.
The party received the support of personalities such as Gamal Abdel Nasser and Kwame Nkrumah and France's action was denounced at the UN by representatives of countries such as India, Syria, and the Soviet Union.
The party supports a negotiated solution to the conflict, and has demanded a ceasefire, the opening of a dialogue, amnesty for everyone jailed because of the crisis, the establishment of a truth and reconciliation commission, and decentralization of the country.
The people of Cameroon are known for their hospitality and warmth.
The percentage of French and English speakers is estimated by the Presidency of Cameroon to be 70% and 30% respectively.
The perpetrators were reported to be natives of Egbekaw.
The phrase "Rio dos Camarões" later became Camarones when the Spanish arrived in the region.
The pirogue sailors of Douala are known for a kind of singing called "Ngoso" which has evolved into a kind of modern music accompanied by zanza, balafon, and various percussion instruments.
The plan included a hospital, the governor residency, the palace of justice, the police station, administrative buildings and buildings for the port and customs (among those the Old Woermann Linie Bachelors House).
The plateau is sparsely populated, and cattle raising is the main occupation in the area.
The police arrested between 200 and 300 people, mostly SCNC supporters, but also members of the Social Democratic Front, an opposition party with significant support in the Anglophone regions.
The population of Cameroon was 27,198,628 in 2021, up from 4,466,000 in 1950.
The power of a Bamileke king, called a Fon, is often represented by the elephant, buffalo, and leopard.
The predominant religions of Central Africa are Christianity and traditional faiths.
The prefix ba- specifically refers to people.
The prefixless form typically does not occur in the language itself, but is the basis for other words based on the ethnicity.
The president and his cabinet hold the main power at the national level, while at the local level, the prefet and sous-prefet hold the most power.
The president appoints government officials at all levels, from the prime minister (considered the official head of government), to the provincial governors and divisional officers.
The president appoints judges at all levels.
The president holds executive power for seven years, for a maximum of two terms.
The president is selected by popular vote every seven years.
The press can write what they want." Following the comments, Barcelona President Joan Laporta was quick to quash rumours of transfers involving Eto'o and Ronaldinho.
The primary opposition is the Social Democratic Front (SDF), based largely in the Anglophone region of the country and headed by John Fru Ndi.
The private company Telcar Cocoa reported that the cocoa production had fallen 80 percent.
The project was long delayed following the concerns with regards to corruption and malpractices relating to the submitted list of 44 beneficiaries.
The proposed removal of term limits was among the grievances expressed during violent protests in late February 2008.
The prose is often mythological or historical and often includes tales of the trickster character.
The protected areas were first created in the northern region under the colonial administration in 1932; the first two reserves established were Mozogo Gokoro Reserve and the Bénoué Reserve, which was followed by the Waza Reserve on 24 March 1934.
The protest escalated into a riot, which was eventually quelled violently.
The protesters were now openly regarded as a security threat by the Cameroonian government, and more arrests followed.
The province and plateau were named after Fulani Muslim leader Modibo Adama, whose jihad significantly affected the population of the area.
The publication Suites architecturales focuses on heritage and reappropriation in the architecture of Douala, and it presents some of the characteristics of the buildings and architecture of Douala after its independence.
The quality of health care is generally low.
The raid and trial resulted in a shutdown of SCNC activities.
The ramifications of this are significant.
The rate of literacy is relatively high among the Duala, though this is for reading and writing European languages.
The rebels later retreated from Belegete on their own, but threatened that they would return at a later date.
The regions are subdivided into 58 divisions (French départements).
The religious poems included devotions, prophetic stories, and poems honoring saints.
The remainder of the basin was divided by the British in Nigeria, who took Kano in 1903, and the Germans in Cameroon.
The report also included a video of a man being tortured by men appearing to be Cameroonian gendarmes.
The repression caused several dozen or hundreds of deaths - the French administration officially lists twenty-two, although secret reports acknowledge many more.
The researchers caution the assumption that the Bamileke are the source of the Bantu migration because the genetic variations in the region could have been very different 4000 years ago.
The rest of Cameroon's energy comes from oil-powered thermal engines.
The rest of the people were fishermen and farmers.
The results in 11 constituencies were later nullified due to separatist activities, triggering a partial re-election in March.
The results owed partly to a fear of domination by much larger Nigeria.
The results were largely the same, with a marginal turnout and clashes taking place throughout the day.
The results were strongly disputed by the opposition, which alleged fraud.
The rights in land held by the deceased were conferred upon the heir subject to the approval of the chief, and, in the event of financial inheritance, the heir was not obliged to share this with other family members.
The river is navigable about 64 km (40 mi) upriver from Douala.
The rivers and forests of Cameroon are beautiful natural resources.
The ruling called for a withdrawal by both countries and denied the request by Cameroon for compensation due to Nigeria's long-term occupation.
The ruling party has had no trouble gaining large majorities.
The rural Duala, in contrast, work as fishermen and farmers, mostly at the subsistence level.
The same day as the start of the trial, the streets of Buea were almost completely deserted.
The same month, it was revealed that the government of Cameroon and separatist movements would enter negotiations.
The same night, separatist fighters attacked the convoy of the Governor of the Northwest Region, injuring at least one government soldier.
The seaport has 8.5 metres (28 feet) of draft.
The season started badly for Eto'o, as he ruptured the meniscus in his right knee during Barcelona's Champions League group stage match against Werder Bremen on 27 September 2006.
The seat of the University of Douala and an important telecommunication centre of Cameroon's telecommunications are located there.
The second placed candidate, John Fru Ndi of the opposition Social Democratic Front (SDF), officially received about 36%.
The second route originated in Nigeria around the Cross River area.
The separatists aim to prevent the Cameroonian state from getting any income from the Anglophone regions, in order to make cost of controlling the region surpass the benefits.
The separatists also seized weapons and equipment.
The separatists also started opening "community schools" across the Anglophone regions, providing an alternative to the government-run schools which they had boycotted for years.
The separatists also started their campaign to sabotage the upcoming 2020 Cameroonian parliamentary election, and within a week they abducted some 40 politicians, including two mayors and at least 19 councilors.
The separatists began to target traditional village chiefs, as well as local administrators whom they accused of siding with the security forces.
The separatists got bolder with enforcing lockdowns.
The separatists had also spread out, and by the end of the year, they were active in five departments.
The separatists had lost around 1,000 fighters.
The separatists in Cameroon are "fighting to create an independent Anglophone state of "Ambazonia" since 2016".
The separatists pursued them into Nigerian territory and killed at least 20 people, injured another 70, and burned down dozens of houses.
The separatists seized soldiers' clothing, weapons and ammunition before heading back into bordering Southwest Region.
The separatists strategically chose this date, as it is the anniversary for the unification of Cameroon and Southern Cameroons.
The separatists suffered a major setback at the beginning of 2018.
The separatists then blew up the checkpoint with grenades, and used a rocket launcher to destroy army vehicles.
The similarity among dispersed Bantu languages had been observed as early as the 17th century.
The soil of most of the country is very fertile and a wide variety of vegetables and fruits, both domestic and imported species, are grown.
The southern depression of the basin is characterized by an asymmetric fault depression composite rift with steep slopes in the east and gentle slopes in the west on the profile, and is distributed in an NNW direction on the plane.
The southern part of British Cameroons federated with it in 1961 to form the Federal Republic of Cameroon.
The southern plateau rises northward to the grassy, rugged Adamawa Plateau.
The southern rainforest has vast timber reserves, estimated to cover 37% of Cameroon's total land area.
The southern tropical forest peoples (18%) include the Beti-Pahuin and their sub-groups the Bulu and Fang, the Maka and Njem, as well as, the Baka pygmies.
The southwestern waters of Lake Chad being freshwater, and the water in the northeast is only slightly salty.
The sport reached its peak during the German colonial period, when organisers held races annually on 27 January (the Kaiser's birthday).
The sso ritual is much-feared by Beti boys as it involves a series of tests to mark a boy's passage into manhood.
The strikes were supported by peaceful protests in the cities of Bamenda, Buea and Limbe.
The study also found that the Shum Laka population cluster closer to Central African rainforest hunter-gatherers than they do to Grassfields populations, and components from Northeast, Northwest, Eastern, Western and Central Africa that contributed to the genomes of Grassfields groups.
The study found that the genetic structure of populations in Cameroon are not completely defined by language groups.
The study identified over 3,500 individuals involved in manuscript production and transmission, including authors, copyists, teachers, and owners, as well as approximately 50 previously unknown authors active in the region.
The successor of the 'father' is chosen among his children.
The successor's identity is typically kept secret until the fon's death.
The summit is cut by several tectonic axes, notably the Debundscha axis (N60–70°), Limbe axis (N140–150°) and Batoke axis (N30–40°), inherited from basement shear zones.
The surrounding dense woodland has been converted to open forest with acacias, baobabs, palms and Indian jujube.
The surrounding residents who used to rely on lake water were forced to relocate, causing the economy of the lake area to continuously shrink.
The system established by Free France was essentially a military dictatorship.
The talks involved President Paul Biya of Cameroon, then President Olusegun Obasanjo of Nigeria, and then UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan, and resulted in Cameroonian control of the oil-rich peninsula.
The talks outlined a series of conditions for the Cameroonian government to accept, which Ayuk Tabe said would create an "enabling environment" for substantial negotiations to occur.
The talks were held between Sisiku Julius Ayuk Tabe and other imprisoned leaders and representatives of the Cameroonian government.
The talks were referred to as the "Swiss Process" but were only supported by one faction of the independence movement.
The team has qualified for the FIFA World Cup eight times, more than any other African team, and four times in a row between 1990 and 2002.
The team has qualified for the FIFA World Cup eight times, more than any other African team.
The team was coached by French-born Claude Le Roy.
The team was coached by French-born Henri Michel.
The team was coached by Russian manager and former player Valeri Nepomniachi.
The technical term Bantu, meaning "human beings" or simply "people", was first used by Wilhelm Bleek (1827–1875), as the concept is reflected in many of the languages of this group.
The temperature difference between day and night is almost twice that of the rainy season, and the lowest nighttime temperature sometimes drops to 8 °C (46 °F) in December and January.
The term "narrow Bantu" was coined by the Benue–Congo Working Group to distinguish Bantu as recognized by Guthrie, from the Bantoid languages not recognized as Bantu by Guthrie.
The term Bantu as a name for the group was not coined but "noticed" or "identified" (as Bâ-ntu) by Wilhelm Bleek as the first European in 1857 or 1858, and popularized in his Comparative Grammar of 1862.
The term narrow Bantu, excluding those languages classified as Bantoid by Malcolm Guthrie (1948), was introduced in the 1960s.
The thatched roof is typically shaped into a tall cone.
The third option, independence, was opposed by the British representative to the UN Trusteeship Council, Sir Andrew Cohen, and as a result was not listed.
The three northernmost regions are the Far North (Extrême Nord), North (Nord), and Adamawa (Adamaoua).
The total length of Sanaga-Djérem River system is about 1,067.5 km (663.3 mi).
The total number of Bantu languages is estimated at between 440 and 680 distinct languages, depending on the definition of "language" versus "dialect".
The total number of Bantu speakers is estimated to be around 350 million in 2015 (roughly 30% of the population of Africa or 5% of the world population).
The transfer of the territory to Cameroon proceeded peacefully under the agreement.
The transfer was successfully accomplished but many inhabitants of the peninsula retained their Nigerian citizenship and remain dissatisfied with the transition.
The trial was complicated by all the Ambazonian leaders rejecting their Cameroonian nationality, which the court ultimately ignored.
The trio of Lionel Messi (38 goals), Eto'o (36 goals) and Thierry Henry (26 goals) scored exactly 100 goals between them in the club's historic treble year.
The two contribute 95% of the total inflow of Lake Chad, while the Yobe River only contributes less than 2.5%.
The two countries attempted to establish a cease-fire in 1996; however, fighting continued for years.
The two disasters are the only recorded instances of limnic eruptions, though geologic and sedimentary evidence indicates they may have caused large localized die-offs before historical records began.
The two groups have been described as having mirror-image tone systems: where Northwest Bantu has a high tone in a cognate, Central Bantu languages generally have a low tone, and vice versa.
The two most popular music styles are makossa and bikutsi.
The unification of British and French Cameroon has caused linguistic and cultural tensions within Cameroon, which has led to violence.
The upper montane forests are less species-rich than the lower-elevation forests, and fires are more frequent.
The urbanization of Cameroon has had a major influence on the country's music.
The vast waters formed during the African humid period provided conditions for the emergence of lakeside fishermen's settlements, and the Nilo-Saharan ethnic group also migrated to Lake Chad during this period.
The vegetation is mostly savanna.
The verb has a number of prefixes, though in the western languages these are often treated as independent words.
The volcano forms an elliptical stratovolcano about 50 km × 35 km with a volume of roughly 1,200 km3.
The volcano has more than 100 cones and vents arranged along NE–SW fractures and experiences both sustained eruptions and brief eruptions.
The war intensified in early 2019.
The water level varies greatly seasonally, and the area of the lake also changes dramatically.
The water source of the lake mainly comes from rivers such as the Chari River that enter the lake.
The water supply of the lake is seasonal.
The water volume of most large lakes in Africa depends on rainfall and evaporation, which means that temperature and precipitation are crucial for regulating the water balance of these bodies of water, and any fluctuations can cause significant changes in their water level and area.
The western region is home of the Bamum people, an ethnic group that also practices the Islamic religion.
The wetland plants in the south mainly include cyperus papyrus, etc.
The withdrawal and handover of control was completed by August 2006.
The women's football team is known as the "Indomitable Lionesses", and like their men's counterparts, are also successful on the international stage, although it has not won any major trophy.
The word "Duala" may refer to the Duala "proper" or to the whole set of Duala-like tribes or even possibly to some "duala-ized" Bakoko or Manenguba tribes.
The word kintu exists in some places, but it means "thing", with no relation to the concept of "language".
The yellow soup is prepared with palm oil, “niki” (also known as potash or limestone), special condiments that enhance the flavor, salt, pepper, and water or stock from a variety of meats such as beef, cow skin, beef tripe.
Theatre of Cameroon is also another important aspect of local culture.
Their bodies were subsequently burned.
Their capitalization is well below the average of banks in the CEMAC region and their profits are close to 2 percent, compared to 20 percent for foreign banks in the country.
Their largest concern, however, was the return of seized Duala lands.
Their settlements lie largely along the coast or just inland.
Their son Mulopwe Luseeng expanded the kingdom.
Then comes perfect tense -me- and an object marker -ki- agreeing with implicit kitabu 'book' (from Arabic kitab).
Then, during the German protectorate in the country which started in 1884, the country's name changed to Kamerun before the Treaty of Versailles placed the country under French and British authority in 1919 which led to the final name "Cameroon".
Then-president Ahmadou Ahidjo feared that Southern Cameroons would secede from the union, taking its natural resources with it.
There are also Muslim mosques.
There are also a number of professional schools, the most prominent one being the Douala Maritime institute.
There are between 25 and 40 million Fulani worldwide.
There are direct flights to several European cities, including Paris, Brussels, and Istanbul.
There are more than 30 million residents in the Chad Lake Basin.
There are more than 70 ethnic groups around the lake, most of whom are distributed on the south bank, where the population density exceeds 100/km2 (260/sq mi).
There are poetic recitations accompanied by clapping and dancing, with interludes for improvised and sometimes obscene performances on the balafon (a type of xylophone).
There are raptors such as steppe eagle and booted eagle on the lakeshore, and more than one million ruff can be observed on the lake at one time.
There are scattered areas of meadow and scrubland, with grasses, herbs, tall herbaceous plants (including Acanthaceae), tree ferns, woody shrubs, and low trees.
There are several high corruption risk areas in Cameroon, for instance, customs, public health sector and public procurement.
There are two large basin‐bounding normal faults developed on both sides of the basin, with a graben style fault and depression in the middle.
There have been numerous literary productions in Africa since the early 2010s, although readership has not always been large.
There he scored 6 goals in 28 league games over two seasons.
There is cautious optimism that Cameroon is emerging from its long period of economic hardship.
There is little literature, radio, or television programming in native Cameroonian languages.
There is no native term for the people who speak Bantu languages because they are not an ethnic group.
There is no true genealogical classification of the (Narrow) Bantu languages.
There is photographic evidence that shows a consistent strategy of burning down villages by Cameroonian forces.
There was heavy fighting in Muyuka, where Cameroon launched an offensive.
There was no provision for a runoff; the opposition was unable to unite around a single candidate.
There were also civilian casualties; one person was killed by soldiers on the first day of the operation.
There were also clashes in Buea.
There were often agreements with these other countries to exchange these precious luxury commodities for slaves, gold, oil, ivory and some types of fine woods.
There, the Indomitable Lions became the first African country to defeat Brazil, courtesy of Samuel Eto'o's tally in the 83rd minute of their opening match on 13 June.
Therefore, citizens are free to practice any religion they choose, without harassment or forceful conversion.
Thermobarometry suggests that magma was stored mainly between 20 and 39 km depth, corresponding to the crust–mantle boundary, with transient shallow pockets (3–12 km) during the 1999 eruption.
These are headed by presidentially appointed divisional officers (préfets).
These are youths from local villages.
These came at a price, however.
These concessions used forced labour to run profitable banana, rubber, palm oil, and cocoa plantations.
These eleven countries are members of the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS).
These extended stays away from Cameroon – while sometimes as short as two weeks and sometimes as long as three months – are almost always referred to as "short stays" in the state-owned press and other media.
These female choruses are an integral part of bikutsi, and their intense dancing and screams are characteristic of the genre.
These flow southwestward or westward directly into the Gulf of Guinea.
These immigrants were primarily Bamileke.
These include 55 Afro-Asiatic languages, two Nilo-Saharan languages, four Ubangian languages, and 169 Niger–Congo languages.
These include the Ewodi, the Bodiman, the Pongo, the Bakole, the Bakweri (or Kwe), the Bamboko, the Isubu (Isuwu or Bimbians), the Limba (or Malimba), the Mungo, the Wovea and Oroko, they are generally known as the SAWA PEOPLE.
These include the Mongo, Kongo and Luba peoples.
These include: Along with the Latin script and Arabic script orthographies, there are also some modern indigenous writing systems used for Bantu languages: The Mwangwego alphabet is an abugida created in 1979 that is sometimes used to write the Chewa language and other languages of Malawi.
These include: Cameroon national football team Cameroon national futsal team Cameroon national rugby league team Cameroon national rugby union team Cameroon national under-23 football team
These include:Cameroon national football team Cameroon national futsal team Cameroon national rugby league team Cameroon national rugby union team Cameroon national under-23 football team
These included Congolese-influenced new rumba and makossa-soukous, as well as more native forms like bantowbol, northern Cameroonian nganja (which had gained some popularity in the United Kingdom in the mid-1980s), and an urban street music called bend-skin.
These interludes signal the shift to the bikutsi phase which is much less strictly structured than Ekang.
These languages include the Akoose language, the Gbaya languages, the Fula language, the Gyele language, the Koonzime language, the Mundang language, the Ngiemboon language, and the Vengo language.
These leaders are charged with implementing the will of the president, reporting on the general mood and conditions of the regions, administering the civil service, keeping the peace, and overseeing the heads of the smaller administrative units.
These manuscripts reflect a wide range of genres, including theology, law, poetry, history, and pedagogy, and illustrate the role of African scholars in transregional intellectual exchanges linking East Africa, the Red Sea, and the broader Islamic world.
These names represent the principal families in each clan: Njo, Priso, Akwa, Ebele-Deido, and Bell, respectively.
These oral traditions exist in many languages including Fula, Swahili, Hausa, and Wolof.
These poems, called Isefra, were used in both religious and secular contexts.
These results led Cameroon to qualify from the group stage to the quarter-finals as their group's winner.
These results were enough for Cameroon to qualify from the group stage to the quarter-finals, where they met Senegal in a close match that Cameroon won 5–4 in a penalty shootout after it had ended goalless in extra time.
These states are now typically considered part of East or Southern Africa.
These talks ultimately failed, and fighting continued.
They also benefitted from fundraising campaigns (including the introduction of their own cryptocurrency, the AmbaCoin), launched by diaspora activists to purchase guns for the separatist militias.
They also declared that they had started producing their own weapons within Southern Cameroons, a declaration followed shortly by an explosion in Mamfe that killed four policemen.
They also had the highest card count per game of any team, collecting an average of four bookings in each match they played.
They also wore backpacks on stage, a reference to Beti women's traditional method of carrying babies while they danced bikutsi.
They are best known for bikutsi music, which has been popularized and become a rival for the more urban and accessible makossa of Douala.
They are composed of evergreen trees with a dense canopy 25 to 30 metres (80 to 100 ft) high, with taller emergent trees rising above the canopy.
They are the earliest people to have left clear traces of their presence in the territory of modern Cameroon.
They are the most popular means of transportation followed by the rail service Camrail.
They argued that Southern Cameroons had effectively been annexed by Cameroon.
They asked for several laws to be translated into English, and that the common law system should be taught at the University of Buea and the University of Bamenda.
They did not lay down their arms at independence and sought to overthrow Ahidjo's regime, which they viewed as too subservient to France.
They finished second in their first-round group before beating Algeria on penalties in the semi-final.
They first qualified for the Africa Cup of Nations in 1970, but were knocked out in the first round.
They form the largest branch of the Southern Bantoid languages.
They have also won five Africa Cup of Nations.
They have historically played a highly influential role in Cameroon due to their long contact with Europeans, high rate of education, and wealth gained over centuries as slave traders and landowners.
They may be an indication of status based on what kinds of beads are used.
They noted an abundance of the ghost shrimp Lepidophthalmus turneranus in the Wouri River and named it Rio dos Camarões (Shrimp River), which became Cameroon in English.
They primarily inhabit the littoral and southwest region of Cameroon and form a portion of the Sawabantu or "coastal people" of Cameroon.
They rely on the water source of Chad Lake for irrigation, breeding, animal husbandry and drinking.
They represent power, strength and bravery, and may also be associated with the Fon.
They saw this as threatening the common law system in the Anglophone regions, as well as part of the general marginalization of Anglophones.
They sell their surplus produce, and some maintain separate fields for commercial use.
They spent 10 months at a gendarme headquarters, before being transferred to a maximum security prison in Yaoundé.
They stimulated interregional trade via a tribute system controlled by the manikongo.
They struggled against the modest Namibian team, managing a 1–1 draw in Yaoundé and then suffering a 2–1 loss in South Africa.
They supported the weaker King Bell to counter the powerful King Akwa.
They then held Poland goalless before a surprise 1–1 draw with eventual winners Italy.
They were experts in metalwork, pottery, and weaving raffia cloth.
They were the first African team to reach the quarter-final of the World Cup in 1990, losing to England in extra time.
They would not qualify for the competition for another ten years.
This Bantu expansion came to dominate Sub-Saharan Africa east of Cameroon, an area where Bantu peoples now constitute nearly the entire population.
This Duala land problem reached a head in 1925 when the French sold lands on the Joss Plateau that the Germans had appropriated.
This also contributes to its cultural diversity as ways of life and traditional food dishes and traditions vary from geographical region to geographical region.
This area has been delineated by the World Wildlife Fund as the Cameroonian Highlands forests ecoregion.
This area is part of the Atlantic Equatorial coastal forests ecoregion.
This began to yield visible results in the first half of 2019.
This came after charges were filed against him following an incident at a 2024 FIFA U-20 Women's World Cup match in Colombia between Brazil and Cameroon.
This class was familiar with European law and conventions, which allowed them to pressure the German colonial government with petitions, legal proceedings, and special interest groups to oppose unpopular or unfair policies.
This coincided with the abolition movement, and the Crown employed the traders to end slavery in the Gulf of Guinea.
This conference issued the "Bamenda Declaration", which stated that if the federal state was not restored within a reasonable time, Southern Cameroons would declare its independence.
This consistency gave Cameroon a reputation as one of the most stable countries in the region.
This culminated in the declaration of an independent Republic of Ambazonia, which has since evolved into the Anglophone Crisis.
This day is now the country's National Day, a public holiday.
This declaration was followed by mass demonstrations across the Anglophone regions.
This economic policy was much criticised by the other colonial powers.
This feature stretches from the western mountain area and forms a barrier between the country's north and south.
This form of education is common in sectors like cloth manufacturing, bread making, construction, security, and car repairing.
This has been called Mega-Chad.
This has been criticized for sowing confusion in one of the few unambiguous ways to distinguish Bantu languages.
This has been exacerbated by the activity of Boko Haram, an insurgency that has displaced millions of people and disrupted development through the region.
This has caused severe loss of morale among Cameroonian soldiers.
This incident was the first of its kind, and possibly indicated that the separatists would take on larger government targets.
This includes burning houses where weapons are found and, according to locals but denied by the army, carrying out revenge attacks.
This is a chart of trend of gross domestic product of Cameroon at market prices estimated by the International Monetary Fund with figures in millions of Central African CFA Francs.
This is an arid region with sparse rainfall and high median temperatures.
This is because kintu refers to "things" and is used as a dehumanizing term for people who have lost their dignity.
This is partially explained by the high levels of non-performing loans, which reached 12 percent in 2007, leading to most banks holding large amounts of excess reserves as a percentage of deposits and large levels of unutilized liquidity.
This is particularly true among the neighbouring Wovea, many of whom speak Duala in lieu of their native tongue, and the Isubu, many of whom are bilingual in Duala.
This is seen as a metaphorical skull of the deceased, blessed by libation.
This is served with a sauce, soup, or stew made from greens, groundnuts, palm oil, or other ingredients.
This is where the English language was permanently established for the first time in Southern Cameroons, when missionary Alfred Saker founded a settlement of freed slaves by Ambas Bay in 1858, which was later renamed Victoria (present-day Limbe).
This latter group comprises one Senegambian language (Fulfulde), 28 Adamawa languages, and 142 Benue–Congo languages (130 of which are Bantu languages).
This latter group comprises one Senegambian language (Fulfulde), 28 Adamawa languages, and 142 Benue–Congo languages .
This makes it a rich fishing ground for communities across Nigeria, Niger, Chad, and Cameroon.
This meant educating them in Western learning and converting them to Christianity.
This number increased to at least 40,000 people by February.
This prompted a long guerrilla war waged by the UPC and the assassination of several of the party's leaders, including Ruben Um Nyobè, Félix-Roland Moumié and Ernest Ouandie.
This region has a mild climate, particularly on the Western High Plateau, although rainfall is high.
This resulted in a very low turnout, as "more than 90 percent of residents" fled violence in some localities; and in many cases no officials showed up to man the polling stations.
This stance is not shared by AGovC.
This stance would eventually change.
This structure proved susceptible to exploitation by colonial powers beginning in the 1870s, who sought to undermine local rulers' ties to the Caliphate.
This takes away most of the salinity and maintains the low salinity of Lake Chad.
This tendency to avoid consonant clusters in some positions is important when words are imported from English or other non-Bantu languages.
This territory was organized as British Cameroons.
This was done in defiance of the IG.
This was done to prevent a re-occurrence of the mass demonstrations that took place the year before.
This was due to a colonial policy known as indirect rule.
This was followed by a military escalation and a series of lockdowns, crushing hopes that the school year could start as normal in early September.
This was followed by a signature referendum the same year, which the organisers claim produced a 99% vote in favour of independence with 315,000 people voting.
This was followed by the second All Anglophone Conference (AAC2) in Bamenda in 1994.
This was particularly the case for the Société financière des Caoutchoucs, which obtained plantations put into operation during the German period and became the largest company in French Cameroon.
This was the deepest Ottoman incursion into the interior of Africa before the nineteenth century.
This was the first known case of talks between the two warring sides, and was met with international endorsement.
This was the third separatist attack in West Region.
Those who live in the cities, particularly Douala itself, earn a living at a number of skilled and unskilled professions.
Though the French had largely stripped their kings of power, almost half of the ethnic group's 15–20,000 members were important traders, plantation managers or owners, chiefs, or clerks in the civil service by the 1930s.
Though the uprising was suppressed, guerilla violence and reprisals continued even after independence.
Thousands of displaced people have fled to protected natural areas, endangering the wildlife there.
Thousands of people have been killed in the war, and more than half a million have been forced to flee their homes.
Thousands of workers were forcibly deported to this site to work fifty-four hours a week.
Three BIR soldiers were wounded when their vehicle struck an IED between Kumbo and Ndop on 10 April.
Three Cameroonian soldiers were killed in the attack, while the ADF claimed their soldiers managed to return to base unreduced.
Three civilians were killed when a bus hit an IED in Sabga on 9 May; separatists claimed responsibility, and said that the IED had been meant for militar targets.
Three days later, separatists blocked the Bamenda-Ndop road in retaliation.
Three months later, Eto'o said, "These kind of things are usually just speculation and don't come through to me.
Three police officers were also injured by a homemade bomb.
Three scientific expeditions were conducted between 1898 and 1909.
Three soldiers managed to escape, two were rescued, one was found dead after five days, and seven remain unaccounted for.
Three soldiers were killed and many others injured in an IED ambush led by Seven Karta in Bafut.
Three trans-African automobile routes pass through Cameroon: the Lagos-Mombasa Highway the Tripoli-Cape Town Highway the Dakar-N'Djamena Highway Transport in Cameroon is often difficult.
Three years later, he escaped to Nigeria.
Through trans-Saharan trade, the power of the Kanem Empire reached its peak in the 13th century, but as the empire declined in the 14th century, its southwestern vassal state of Bornu began to rise, causing the power center of the empire to shift to Bornu around 1400.
Throughout 2017, there were no reports of ADF using violence against civilians.
Throughout May, there were heavy clashes in Mbonge and Muyuka, resulting in heavy casualties.
Throughout November 2016, thousands of teachers in the Anglophone regions joined the lawyers' strike.
Throughout November, eight soldiers, at least 14 civilians and five fugitives were confirmed killed due to the conflict.
Throughout September, separatists carried out two bombings; one targeting security forces in Bamenda, and another targeting police officers.
Throughout election day, there were clashes in Bamenda.
Throughout the day, armed clashes took place in Muyuka, Bafut, Mundum and Mamfe.
Throughout the day, at least eight demonstrators were killed in Buea and Bamenda.
Throughout the day, security forces and separatists clashed in Buea, Bamenda and other cities.
Thus the Kundu, Lue, Mbonge, Ekombe, Londo ba Nanga, Londo ba Diko, Ngolo, Bima, Tanga and Koko are Duala (Sawa) people.
To commemorate the occasion, separatist fighters raised flags in several areas in the Anglophone regions, including in Buea.
To negotiate the terms of this union, the Foumban Conference was held on 16–21 July 1961.
To preserve its wildlife, Cameroon has more than 20 protected reserves comprising national parks, zoos, forest reserves, and sanctuaries.
To prevent the Anglophone Crisis from becoming a full-fledged intercommunal war, Cameroonian authorities have sought to gain as much support among the Anglophone population as possible.
To satisfy the Ancestors, the person believed to be a murderer must perform a special ritual that consists of the pouring out of libation during the burial ceremony.
To this end, local authorities have penalized businesses that respected "ghost towns" declared by the separatists.
Today, Cameroon is one of the African countries with the highest number of people with knowledge of German.
Today, several ethnic groups of northern Cameroon and southern Chad but particularly the Sara people claim descent from the civilization of the Sao.
Today, the dominant form of worship is still ancestral with most Bamileke practicing Veneration of the ancestors.
Toukam, Dieudonné (2008), Parlons bamiléké.
Toukam, Dieudonné (2016; first ed.
Tourist literature describes Cameroon as "Africa in miniature" because it exhibits all major climates and vegetation of the continent: coast, desert, mountains, rainforest, and savanna.
Tourists on the mountain reported strong explosions followed by visible "flames" and ash from a vent.
Tours of Japan, Africa, Europe, and the United States followed, as well as Claire Denis' film Man No Run, which used footage from their European tour.
Towards the end of July, two major prison riots took place.
Towards the end of the month, Cameroon initiated Operation Free Bafut, a series of raids in and around Bafut that aimed at completely rooting out separatist presence in the area.
Towards the end of the month, separatists drew condemnation from Human Rights Watch for abducting and maltreating a humanitarian worker and members of a non-profit organization.
Towards the end of this period the climate became drier.
Trade and improved agricultural techniques enabled more sophisticated societies.
Trade and improved agricultural techniques supported more sophisticated societies, leading to the early civilizations of West Africa: Sao, Kanem, Bornu, Shilluk, Baguirmi, and Wadai.
Trade dramatically altered Duala society.
Traders exploited this atmosphere and beginning in 1860, German, French, and Spanish merchants had established contacts and weakened the British monopoly.
Traditional Duala society was divided into three strata.
Traditional arts and crafts are practised throughout the country for commercial, decorative, and religious purposes.
Traditional dances are highly choreographed with men and women often participating separately.
Traditional festivals held each year serve as the most visible expression of these traditional beliefs in modern times.
Traditional healers remain a popular alternative to evidence-based medicine.
Traditional homes are constructed by first erecting a raffia-pole frame into four square walls.
Traditional housing styles use local materials and vary from temporary wood-and-leaf shelters of nomadic Mbororo to the rectangular mud-and-thatch homes of southern peoples.
Traditional music in Cameroon includes makossa and bikutsi styles.
Traditional sports include canoe racing and wrestling, and several hundred runners participate in the 40 km (25 mi) Mount Cameroon Race of Hope each year.
Traditionally, Africans do not radically separate art from teaching.
Traditionally, it has been excavated in blocks and transported across the lake to enter the Nigerian market.
Traditionally, music is transmitted orally.
Traditionally, the cocoyam and bananas are boiled, peeled, and then pounded in a mortar with a pestle to form the dough.
Transfer every competence related to the running of internal affairs of Cameroon to Cameroonians".
Trees up to 20 metres (65 ft) high form an open-canopied forest with numerous epiphytes.
Tribal clashes took place in Ndu, where armed Fulani killed two civilians.
Two days later, Nigerian troops attempted a rescue mission in the jungle, during which an Ambazonian fighter was killed.
Two days later, it was revealed that Cameroonian forces had killed "General Ayeke", commander of the "Gorilla Fighters" militia, in Besali, Wabane, Lebialem.
Two days later, separatists killed three gendarme officers, one policeman and two civilians at a checkpoint in Matazem.
Two distinct magma types were erupted from two different magma chambers.
Two main channels and several smaller lava flows covered roughly 4.5×106 m2 with thicknesses of 5–12 m (16.4-40 ft).
Two of the main markets of the city (Central market and Marché Nkololoun) are in the area.
Two persons were killed during clashes in Banga Bakundu.
Two separatist fighters known as "Colonel John" and "General Rasta" including 15 other ADF fighters were killed by the Cameroonian forces in Bambui, and another 18 were said to have been captured.
Two separatist fighters were also killed in Jakiri.
Two separatists were killed by government troops while attacking a polling station.
Two species of birds are endemic to Mount Cameroon, Mount Cameroon spurfowl (Pternistis camerunensis) and Mount Cameroon speirops (Zosterops melanocephalus).
Two weeks into the protests, more than 100 protesters had been arrested, and six were reported dead.
Two weeks later, Eto'o scored from the penalty spot against Bari in his first Serie A match.
Two years later, Cameroon qualified for the 1984 Africa Cup of Nations, held in Ivory Coast.
Two years later, aged 17, he became the Cameroonian schools high jump champion.
Two years later, as hosts, the Indomitable Lions finished third after being knocked out by their neighbors and future champions Congo in the 1972 Africa Cup of Nations.
Two years later, he was part of the squad competing at the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles, California.
USA investment in Cameroon is about $1 million, most of it in the oil sector.
Ultimately, the constitutional term limits were revoked and Biya was reelected in 2011 in an election criticized by the opposition and international observers as plagued by irregularities and low turnout.
Unconfirmed videos released over social media showed various violent scenes, including the beating of protesters by policemen.
Under the French, they became semiannual, occurring on 14 July (Bastille Day) and 11 November (Armistice Day).
Under the aegis of Germany, commercial companies were local administrations.
Under the constitution, Biya has sweeping executive and legislative powers.
Unemployment was estimated at 3.38% in 2019, and 23.8% of the population was living below the international poverty threshold of US$1.90 a day in 2014.
United Nations figures indicate that more than 21,000 people have fled to neighbouring countries, while 160,000 have been internally displaced by the violence, many reportedly hiding in forests.
Unlike most Cameroonian soldiers deployed in the region, the separatists are locals, and are thus more familiar with the terrain.
Unlike the rural populations of Cameroon that can grow their own foods to lessen their expenses, Douala locals are disadvantaged by living in the port city where there are not many opportunities for monetary gain.
Until recently most attempted classifications only considered languages that happen to fall within traditional Narrow Bantu, but there seems to be a continuum with the related languages of South Bantoid.
Up to the late 1930s, a family on Jebale Island claimed to be able to summon the Miengu water spirits to help favoured participants.
Upper montane forest grows from 1,600–1,800 metres (5,200–5,900 ft) elevation.
Urban centres are particularly reliant on peasant agriculture for their foodstuffs.
Valence change and Oroko verb morphology (PDF) (Thesis).
Vincent Aboubakar netted the contest's lone goal in the 2nd minute of stoppage time, and subsequently received his second booking and dismissal for removing his shirt during his celebration.
Vincent Nguini also contributed guitar arrangements and performance to Simon's Rhythm of the Saints, which became an influential world music album, introducing many North American listeners to the wide range of instrumentation and genres.
Volcanism here has created crater lakes.
We are building a language model that understands Cameroon languages.
We need to work together to build a better future for Cameroon.
We try to seek them out but we can't find them.
We've worked hard all season and have got our just rewards." Eto'o also contributed six goals during Barcelona's run to the 2005–06 Champions League title.
Well-known words and names that have reduplication include: Bafana Bafana, a football team Chipolopolo, a football team Eric Djemba-Djemba, a footballer Lomana LuaLua, a footballer Repetition emphasizes the repeated word in the context that it is used.
When Cameroon was colonized, the British granted status and a certain amount of control to traditional authorities, such as the Fon.
When King Pass All of the Limba ceded his territories to the French, British traders expressed the urgency of annexing the Duala territories to the Crown.
When served, it is typically paired with the meats or fish, which can be boiled, fried, or smoked and sometimes vegetables on the side.
When the League of Nations ceased to exist in 1946, British Cameroons was reclassified as a UN trust territory, administered through the UN Trusteeship Council, but remained under British control.
When the Portuguese arrived in the region in the fifteenth century, a large number of kings, chiefs, and fons ruled small territories.
When the dry season starts they move back south, either to grazing lands around the lakes and floodplains, or to the savannas further to the south.
When the water level in the south exceeds 279 m (915 ft) above sea level, it will flow into the north.
While SOCADEF extended its unilateral ceasefire, separatists carried out coordinated attacks on several villages, assassinated members of a traditional council and abducted three government officials.
While casualties related to the battle of Ekona remain unconfirmed, the Cameroonian government later declared that more than 40 soldiers and policemen died in the later half of June across Southern Cameroons.
While civilian casualties are hard to determine, in May 2019 they were estimated by independent sources to be around 650 killed, out of a total death toll of 1,850.
While federalist movements claimed that the conflict had taken 3,000–5,000 lives as of the summer of 2019, separatists claimed that between 5,000 and 10,000 people had been killed.
While foreign banks generally display good solvency ratios, small domestic banks are in a much weaker position.
While in France, Les Têtes Brulées recorded their first LP, Hot Heads, which was also the first bikutsi music recorded for the CD.
While makossa enjoyed international renown, bikutsi was often denigrated as the music of savages, and it did not appeal across ethnic lines and into urban areas.
While member states of the African Union and France have taken either a neutral stance or sided with the Cameroonian government, several European countries and the United States have criticized Cameroon.
While most militants laid down their arms in November 2009, some carried on fighting for years.
While separatists were quick to reject the initiative, citing the recent life sentences handed to the separatist leaders, opposition parties in Cameroon showed interest in the initiative and started submitting proposals.
While the Major National Dialogue was happening, a significant number of Anglophones celebrated Ambazonia's third independence day on 1 October.
While the aforementioned percentage is doubled for rural regions, poverty is a growing problem for Douala due to its steadily increasing population.
While the first bombing failed, the second injured three policemen.
While the microfinance sector is consequently becoming increasingly important, its development is hampered by a loose regulatory and supervisory framework for microfinance institutions (MFIs).
While the northern part of Cameroon was subject to influence from the Islamic kingdoms in the Chad basin and the Sahel, the south was largely ruled by small kings, chieftains, and fons.
Win Draw Loss Fixture The following players were selected for the 2026 FIFA series in March 2026.
With 496 illustrations from photographs ...
With IEDs becoming a growing threat to its soldiers, the BIR has allegedly forced civilians to act as human minesweepers.
With Inter's triumph over Bayern Munich, he became the only player to win the treble in consecutive seasons with two different teams.
With a cost of almost CFA 141.6 billion, the second bridge on the Wouri river is 756 m (2,480 ft) long and 34 m (112 ft) wide and has a 746 m-long (2,448 ft) railway.
With a population estimated in 25 million people, UNESCO classified the country as a distinctive cultural density.
With an initial capacity of 2,000 vehicles per day, this bridge now supports more than 45,000 vehicles everyday creating monstrous traffic at the entrance of Douala's heart.
With few exceptions, such as Kiswahili and Rutooro, Bantu languages are tonal and have two to four register tones.
With no military victory in sight, the Cameroonian Army has sought to at least contain the conflict to rural areas.
With no trace of bullet wounds on any of the bodies, unconfirmed reports alleged the use of chemicals by the soldiers.
With superior organization, they were able to conquer their neighbors and extract tribute.
With the Europeans providing such a hungry market, however, these customs gave way.
With the arrival of the Portuguese in the 15th century, the area was known as Rio dos Camarões.
With the crisis boiling came the rise of separatists who committed inhumane acts.
With the defeat of Germany in World War I, Kamerun became a League of Nations mandate territory and was split into French Cameroon (French: Cameroun) and British Cameroon in 1919.
With the increase from 16 teams to 24, Cameroon qualified along with Algeria to represent Africa at the tournament in Spain.
With the reintroduction of multi-party politics in December 1990, the former British Southern Cameroons pressure groups called for greater autonomy, and the Southern Cameroons National Council advocated complete secession as the Republic of Ambazonia.
Within Northern and Grassfields groups, fine-structured analysis distinguished populations living less than 20 km from each other.
Within a week, more than 300 villagers had fled, fearing the presence of soldiers and a repeat of the Ngarbuh massacre.
Within a week, violence and uncertainty had triggered tens of thousands of people to flee from the Anglophone regions.
Within two months, the government sent its army into the Anglophone regions.
Within two weeks in the later half of June, the official figure went up to more than 120 dead.
Without claiming responsibility for the attack, Ayaba Cho Lucas declared that henceforth, whenever Cameroonian forces killed Anglophone civilians, the ADF would retaliate by killing civilians from the Francophone parts of Cameroon.
Witnessed said that it was dropped there by separatist fighters.
Woodcarvings and sculptures are especially common.
Workers also suffered from lack of food and the massive presence of mosquitoes and related illnesses.
Working Group on Arbitrary Detention since 2005, Michel was released under Biya's personal decree but the Working Group's tripartite demands remain unfulfilled.
Wrappers and loincloths are used extensively by both women and men but their use varies by region with influences from Fulani styles more present in the north and Igbo and Yoruba styles in the south and west.
Wrappers and loincloths are used extensively by both women and men but their use varies by region, with influences from Fulani styles more present in the north and Igbo and Yoruba styles more often in the south and west.
Xenoliths of dunite, wehrlite and clinopyroxenite in some strombolian cones indicate additions from the mantle and lower crust.
Xhosa umntu "person", abantu "people"; Zulu umuntu "person", abantu "people").
Yaoundé is the capital city of Cameroon.
Years of contact with Westerners and a high level of literacy had allowed a literate upper class of clerks, farmers, and traders to emerge.
Yet because of its oil reserves and favorable agricultural conditions, Cameroon still has one of the best-endowed primary commodity economies in sub-Saharan Africa.
Younger activists formed the Southern Cameroons Youth League (SCYL) in Buea on 28 May 1995.
Youthful artists like Gibraltar Drakuss, Zele le Bombardier, Eboue Chaleur, Pasto, Roger Bekono, Mbarga Soukous, and Saint-Desiré Atango was a return to the aggressive, earthy sound of bikutsi roots.
Zimbabwe has Kalanga, Matebele, Nambya, and Xhosa speakers.